On negotiating in teamsPodcast by The Negotiation Challenge. Host is Remi Smolinskihttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddJI6dGlfDs Oct. 12., 2022RSWhen we compare individual negotiations with Team negotiations, which ones which of them are more often do we negotiate more often individually or in teams? What do you think?2:45WBYeah, this is a good question because it brings up why we care about teams. So generally, when you're when we're negotiating with an organization representing an organization, we're mostly working in team. when we are negotiating for ourselves inside of your own organization, it's very often alone or one to one with you and another manager in these day to day interactions that are that are negotiations but not so formal. They're often one person to one person. Where we line up in teams mostly is when representing our organizations and in those situations will often be in numbers like two to six or seven. teams are usually not much bigger than that. And the reason is that they become cumbersome to deal with. However, we should remember that in some cultures, the size of the team that you bring, indicates the seriousness that you're bringing, and it also is a bit competitive. So the home team might add in people that are not really at all involved in the negotiation, just to have more people at the conference room table. So this is something we find in some cultures, especially where I live here in East Asia. It's not uncommon to find inflation in the number of Team Members here.4:35 RSSo when we compare, would you say representation is one of the situations when we typically add further individuals to our teams? What else does it make sense to increase the number of participants when it when it comes to negotiating in business politics, diplomacy?4:56 WBYeah, a key issue here is complexity. So we need to think about complexity and specialization. So if there are technical issues, whether they are you know, technical issues, I mean, around could be around technology in a research and development negotiation, or they could be around numbers and types of equipment if it's an arms reduction negotiation, or if it's a trade negotiation that can be, you know, the number and volume of certain kinds of fruits and vegetables and equipment or something. So the complexity is an issue here. And in those cases, you will need, logically, you'll need more specialists who are able to focus on the technical matter. And that's, so that's going to dictate some of it. Very often we have some standard members, especially in a business negotiation, and that might be might include a legal counsel, and maybe production managers or something like that, or project managers. Again, those are specialists. They're there because they know the ins and outs of that activity.6:25 RSSo, representation complexity, which calls for specialists as as team as potential Team Members, so which means that there is a there is an advantage and value in increasing the team size to incorporate the knowledge that the individual negotiators negotiated that individual negotiators cannot have, but what are the disadvantages or what are other advantages? And maybe disadvantages of having, having a team instead of individual negotiators at the negotiating table.7:00 WBOkay, so one of the other advantages that we really have to think about that's very important is that the Team Members can share their knowledge and their experience leading up to this leading up to that negotiation. So negotiation is one of those activities that we get better and better at, the more we do it. So the people with greater frequency of negotiation events in their workday or, or their lives, and inevitably, the people who are a little bit older, have more knowledge and therefore they can share more. So if you bring in those people, you're able to improve the quality and ability of your whole team. So a team is kind of like a… creates a virtual cycle inside of itself, just by existing and if you can have the same team through multiple negotiations, I believe that you get more benefits of this sort because that team is going to be comfortable with each other. With the members comfortable with each other, they will know how they interact well, and they may develop their own chemistry and ability to organize themselves. So these are at least some of the some of the key advantages here.8:41 RSPeter Kesting and Remi Smolinski wrote a paper about a routine and negotiation. So with repetitions you know skills improve. Having the same participants on the team and negotiation is important we develop something which we call the routine with respect to the substance and with respect to the people involved.  9:05 WB Yes, that is what I meant that also routine among the Team Members is going to be very important. They're also going to gain some specific skills. So you and I have similar feelings about negotiation that it is something that is built on multiple skills, and some of those skills can be taught and shared. And explained and improved and so on. So that's something that is also going to improve within the team as they continue on to multiple negotiations. So they will know the mechanics of preparation. They'll know the mechanics of really difficult things like timing, you know, that's, that's something that is intuitive and very difficult to pin down, but they will become better at it. And then they will also know the routines that that they take into the interactions or the work that they do.10:13 RSSo now we're thinking, you know, the more the better, right, because the more routine the more the more expertise, the more experience, right? It's almost sounds that the negotiating teams should be infinitely large, right,10:29 WBDefinitely not!10:33 RSRight, exactly. So what is there an ideal team size? When does it kick? When does the coordination effort become too complex?10:43 WBWell, there is no clear research on this question. So we know from you know, other research that there is, for language conversation training, for example, there is a an ideal size, which is interestingly five people because it turns out that that is the size group that can keep a conversation going and developing longer than three or four people without getting confused and breaking up into smaller groups when you have six or seven. So unfortunately, we don't know this about negotiation teams. There are there are huge teams that are documented. And a classic example of this would be a trade negotiation, which I already mentioned can be very, very complicated. And you would have sub teams for all the imaginable categories of products and services that two countries might want to exchange. So in the case of multiple countries, organizing a large group trade agreement, each country might bring 50 or more people to the event. And then the total number of people negotiating can be very big in the conference rooms can have large numbers of people or relatively small specialist groups. But yeah, they those teams then can be 50 up to 100. Even people at the very top they're still likely to have an overall coordinator, a Lead Negotiator, usually is how the news media refer to that person or Chief Negotiator who has to have some overview and then there will be some kind of sub teams and this is obviously going to be very cumbersome. Getting down to the ideal number actually in the room on any given topic: we have no guidance and no data and no research. My gut feeling is that more than five or six is probably not going to add much value. And if you do have more than that you might consider taking some of the special topics and working on them separately, so that there is a smaller group talking at any given time. Now a there are, as I say, there's no really well developed data but there are cases that are well described in in the literature and in news media and so on and so forth. And one that I really like putting in front of my students is the negotiation in which Microsoft acquired the cell phone business. of Nokia. So this is from approximately 2011 and the Nokia CEO, named Siilasmaa, wrote a book about it and it's very readable, fantastically interesting. And what they did was, after their first contact and they had some larger groups and had some difficulty communicating, they switched to four people on each side. A four by four system where one pair was the CEOs. The next pair were the legal counsel. The next pair were the finance CFO. And the next pair was I think operations people or something so that brought the size down to a group that was very manageable. And the interactions weren't too complicated. And the logistics of it were not too difficult. Also you know, we have to also think about practicalities of moving seven or 10 or 15 people from one city to another. It gets expensive.15:21 RSYes, that's true. So you've mentioned Will, you've mentioned Lead Negotiators and I know that you've spent a lot of time thinking about different negotiation in different positions and roles that individuals can assume within teams. Could you could you briefly share what kind of roles those are, what kind of positions are there in negotiation teams and maybe you know with, with a few words of explanation what those positions are responsible, general responsible,15:54 WBokay. Yeah. So number one is, or at least the number one top of the list is the Lead Negotiator. And we've mentioned that so Lead Negotiators are responsible for basically everything and that means that they are going to they're, they're in charge of or they have to be ready to coordinate the preparation. So preparation phase before the actual talking and communication can be very lonely. You know, it can be weeks, months or even years something like that. And the Lead Negotiator has to have the overall sense of “what do we need to know and who in my organization can find that and organize the information?” Or “do I have to hire a consultant or something?” So the Lead Negotiator then delegates the people divides up the work, coordinates what they're going to do and learn and how to present it and analyze it. And additionally, the that Lead Negotiator is a little bit like a classic project manager, they have to manage the stakeholders. They have to communicate with the Final Decision Makers. They may have a public face, they may be required to deal with the with the press or something like that. They will have to understand special issues. Like you know, what are the BATNAs involved, what are the BATNAs for our side and for the other side, they may coordinate or they should coordinate the image management and even that is likely to happen on the level of the organization, the level of the team, and the individual level. And also striking the right image at the right time. These are responsibilities of the Lead Negotiator. So that's a lot.18:11 RSThat's, a lot I'm sure he or she needs a lot more help from other roles, I suppose. Right? Yeah.18:20 WBSo, in this list is Spokesperson so the one of the things that the Lead Negotiator might easily delegate is the actual direct communication in the meetings with the other parties. The Lead Negotiator doesn't actually have to say and do everything. They can hand the job to one person who becomes the primary speaker and therefore proposes things and reacts to offers from the other side. So the Spokesperson should be able to communicate well face to face, should be able to improvise, and should not be uncomfortable with sudden new information in this sort of thing. And the Spokesperson has the… Using a Spokesperson has the advantage that there is no cross talk or confusion or contradiction happening inside the team. So it's a question of, you know, it's partly a question of discipline. These specialists will not speak directly to the other side if it all goes through the Spokesperson and I've seen this done at The Negotiation Challenge. And some of those teams have won! And that is because they used the Spokesperson to keep a very clear style of communication and have no contradictions or confusion. That's the Spokesperson then. The other one that we've already mentioned then are specialists and Team Members. So I usually think of Team Members as being a specialist like you'll have your legal specialist or the finance person or a technical person, an IT person or electronics person, whatever. But they could also be a generalist who's very good at operations of the company or good at bringing together different parts of the negotiation. So Team Members could be specialists or they could be knowledgeable generalists. There's a team who is populating the table. So you know, we might have your Lead Negotiator in the room, maybe using a Spokesperson and a couple of 2, 3, 4 Team Members specialist generalists there. And that's kind of what we think of as the basic team. But there's more. There's more. Yeah. So the next one that I've already mentioned is the Final Decision Maker, which could be one person or a group of people and the Final Decision Maker is very often or usually not in the negotiations. However sometimes they do enter with interesting results. So the Final Decision Maker is usually the strategic level person above the Lead Negotiator in the organization, who has the authority and the right to say yes or no, ultimately, and so typically, in a large organization, it'll be the CEO and in a small or smaller organization that can be further down the chain of command. And in many cases, it will be more than one person. It could be the whole board of directors. If it's a labor management negotiation, then the whole union is the Final Decision Maker because a body of some 1000s of people that will vote to accept or reject what the Lead Negotiator brings to them. So this Final Decision Maker is very interesting. That's a high power position. Usually the Final Decision Maker does not participate directly in the talks. And we have some examples of big failures when they do.  sometimes egos become important or you know, they want to improve the deal at the last minute and everything fails, or they maybe make a big mistake. And a classic example of this might be the Hewlett Packard acquisition of Autonomy, which was 2011 or 2012. That final deal in agreement was done. Between the to the purchasing CEO and the buying and the selling CEO. The purchaser was Leo Apotheker, formerly of SAP, and the deal was done in a boutique hotel in the countryside in France. the selling side was able to get an extremely good deal which was ratified but ultimately was a big catastrophe for HP. So, Final Decision Makers have a very important role in ratifying; usually they're not directly involved in creating the deal.24:38 RSSo, all these roles with all these roles that you mentioned, and shared, when you for example, send your teams to negotiation competitions, which are typically conducted in in teams and between teams, not individuals. How do you assign or how do we assess Shall we assign these roles to individual negotiators? Is there a procedure is there a, an algorithm that sort of prerequisites that we that a person needs to fulfill in order to be suitable for a particular role? How does it work?25:14Well, this is a really nice question and definitely something to to dig into. Which is a way of saying that I don't have an answer for it! And I love the idea of being able to figure out a sensible algorithm for it. So we have to think of it. Think of a couple of things here though, in most organizations are not sophisticated about negotiating. And as your previous guest on the podcast, Francesco Marchi said, you there's very few that are mature in their capacity and their ability to negotiate well and retain the skills and repeat and get good results. So unfortunately, in my experience.  It would be quite nice to look into other cases for this.26:13 WBThe Lead Negotiator very often has no say in building the team. It's just given to them ad hoc by the boss and the boss says, go do this and take, take Sally and Fred with you and do it. And the boss doesn't know much about how it's going to be done. So there you are. You're responsible and you've got Fred, who's a nice guy but doesn't have all the skills you want and you've got Sally and someone else, and what are you going to do? So, in the ideal situation, the Lead Negotiator is aware of who is capable in the organization and has an understanding of where the skills are and who's got what abilities and knows those people. Maybe has worked with them before. So that Lead Negotiator also, ideally, has the freedom to go and select a team and this would be the best situation. Then they could decide based on some personality issues, skills and appropriate content background and that would, we can in deciding who should go on to a team. The Lead Negotiator would ideally also be able to think about an easy way to think about those personalities. So one of the things that I do with teach my students is the comes from Leigh Thompson's book The Mind and Heart of a Negotiator. And she proposes an “emotional style” based on a questionnaire that evaluates you based on your rationality, positiveness and negativeness. All three of those are quite important aspects of your personality that you ideally can switch on and off at the right time. So “negative” is not a bad thing. In that scheme, it it's the ability to be able to say no and to make fine adjustments and do some distributive thinking. And, you know, we don't always want to be positive all the time that can lead us into happy mistakes. So this is a kind of heuristic tool that I teach my students about teams and team management, and one that they can become in, you know, over a few sessions they can become pretty comfortable with. So after I introduce it to them, you figure out, assess yourself and try to work to your strengths and be aware of when you might make mistakes and now, think about your Team Members left and right of you. And then ultimately, what is your feeling about the person on the other side of the table on this kind of scheme? So that's part of team management, that, you know, ideally, we can think about, we know the styles and we can assess them, of your teammates. And then also the people across the table from you. So yeah, this definitely means that the good negotiator has a lot of different skills and tools and gets better and better at them.RSI was wondering, well, what's your opinion about the connection between the assignment of roles and the team? And team performance? So let me give you a little bit more of a background to what I mean. We've noticed during The Negotiation Challenge, during our negotiation competitions, that teams that perform well cover a wide spectrum of negotiations, negotiation trades, yes. So for example, you know, there's a fair view of empathy that must be present at the table. There is a fair deal of analytics that must be that must be covered there. And there is also a fair deal of eloquence communication skills slash rhetorical, it has to be represented. How is how do you how do you how would you? First of all, how do you see this and what would be the connection between the skills and roles that and that we've just discussed.WBSo this is this is quite a good question. So in the end, the a good Lead Negotiator has all of this. So they've got the right combination of the of the three that you mentioned. And they also have some of the Big Five personality traits. Now we talk about the six the HEXACO and one of them is you know openness and curiosity. And your Lead Negotiator needs to have as much of all of these as possible. The good negotiators generally willing to say a lot and have a lot of curiosity. And they also have the rhetorical ability, rhetorical, meaning the speaking ability, and motivation to ask question after question after question after question. So this, I'm convinced is this is also part of personality, and unfortunately, I don't have this myself as much as I would like to. The negotiators that I've seen, whether students or in real life, the ones who are following up with another question and another question and another question, are the ones who really develop the information and therefore they develop the opportunities to find solutions, and to create new value and bring more into the negotiation. So if there was any one thing that I would want, most of all it would be that rhetorical ability to ask narrow questions at the right time and open questions at the right time, and to continually bring that information out.4:27 RSSo let us continue with asking quick practicing asking questions. Hold us. Let's pick a little bit on the role of the of the Lead Negotiator which we've mentioned quite extensively, and I was thinking in terms of leadership of a negotiating team as how does this How does this work right Lead Negotiator does not only have the responsibility of leading the negotiation itself, but it also has to somehow lead the team and that's negotiating practice practically on the same side of the negotiation table and how does leadership work in negotiating teams?WBYeah, leadership here has to work. The Lead Negotiator should be able to do all or almost all of these many, many tasks but must at least know that they exist and what they are. But the Lead Negotiator can delegate quite a lot, nearly all of it, to the people on the team, if they have the skills. And if there's time you know, the Lead Negotiator can train them appropriately. So, this means that the Lead Negotiator can take some of the leadership styles that we know about from leadership research, and that means they can take a servant leadership point of view, where they are supporting the team by taking away the obstacles that the team might face. They can take on a transformative leader kind of approach where they are nurturing and building up the Team Members so that they become better and more capable and so on and so forth. And other leadership approaches. So when we were speaking before the podcast you mentioned Jeswald Salacuse’s book. The leader as negotiator, what is the title? RS“Real leaders negotiate” WBYes, “Real leaders negotiate”. Yeah. So leaders are nearly constantly in some kind of negotiation with their Team Members and their superiors and so on. But actual negotiators can take on this style of leadership that suits that person or suits the team.RSYes, so what I was, thank you all for sharing this. I was wondering also about the implications of negotiating in teams. On different stages of the negotiation process. So let's pick on two because we're probably won't have enough time to discuss all of those of those stages. Let's talk about preparation and the actual information exchange negotiations. So what is easier, what is harder? What sort of implications of having a team in a negotiation rather than individual negotiators?WBYeah, okay. So very good. Good question. An important thing to think about during the preparation phase. And really, I think about two preparation phases. One is the big picture phase that's very early on where you're thinking about strategic issues and the whole value chain and the second preparation phase is when you're designing the Deal, deal design, right? So and that's closer to the actual time of interacting. So in that first, early preparation phase, big picture architecture, strategic thinking, the Lead Negotiator, if they have the resources, if it's a big organization, and there's time and money, you know, they can, they can hire a whole library full of researchers and they can get immense amount of detail and there if they may have time to go very deep into technical issues or to forecast out into the distant future for what should be done. When and so on and so forth. So, if we think about the biggest negotiations, I think of trade negotiations between countries, there would be a year of advance time and if there are long delays, there could be another year. And there would be a lot of resources available from a government concerned about how they're going to have their, what their balance of trade will look like for the coming decade or so they're going to assign lots of staff usually, and they will be high skilled people, you'll have economists and all kinds of specialists available to you. So at that point, in those situations, the team that is not going to go to the negotiation, but is still part of the research team and the big team in general. That can be a very big group and they can be very active and they can generate a huge amount of knowledge. So having a large team at that time makes a lot of sense. When you get to the deal design phase and you're crafting packages of offers, and you're considering the trade-offs that you're willing to give and what kind of bargaining chips you might create in advance that you can give away. In this sort of thing, probably there you need a smaller group of people that are more focused and that can communicate more easily. So at that point, having 100 people would be a cumbersome problem. Having 5, 10, 15 or even 20 might be much, much more practical and sensible. Then when you go to the to the actual interacting with the counterparties and you're exchanging information we'd like to think of this as face to face at a table but very often Of course it's going by your messaging and your email and short phone calls and so on. You know when that starts, then we're down to the kind of team that we talked about earlier in the podcast where, you know, three to seven, might be somewhere in the ideal, depending on complexity and the issues and soRSI may attempt to summarize what I've learned today is in preparation for our talk. Negotiating in teams in terms of preparation probably increases the complexity of the preparation and coordination process, before the negotiation and at the table, and, but at the same time, it makes it makes it easier during the process in terms of, you know, noticing value generating options or using the expertise that is necessary at the right time streamlining the negotiation process. itself and, and crafting a crafting wiser agreements, would you agree is there or what is what is your opinion in terms of the impact of negotiating and teams on the process and the outcome?WB Yeah, so I think if we have a team we're likely to be able to avoid mistakes. So you know, everybody makes mistakes. And if it is a, an important strategic negotiation that can be catastrophic. So, you know, fundamentally the mistakes were made in the Hewlett Packard autonomy negotiation. And, frankly, we can we can I have kind of a hobby of looking through the news media for negotiation there. There's a lot of them that are on display. And if you have a team that knows how to work together, and then you have redundancy so that if somebody makes a mistake, somebody can help them correct it. And you have redundancy of checking and making sure that the documents are in order and that the knowledge is in order and so on. You know that in the business world one of the classic problems is that the negotiators have an agreement and they put it on paper, and they take it to their legal counsel to finalize, and the legal counsel just puts in whatever they feel like and if it's not checked and double checked by the team, it can lead to broken relationships and bad agreements and bad surprises. So teams can… this is one of the big benefits of teams is that you know, two heads are better than one, sometimes four or five heads are better than that, because of the ability to what's the right word redundancy and resilience in in the interaction.