Negotiation skills include:* Identifying and using key negotiating strategies;* Identifying monetary and non-monetary interests of all parties;* Using various methods to prepare properly, including:- understanding your counterparts and - organizing before negotiating- discovery of interests and perspectives* Using questions to understand the goals of counterparts;* Providing and receive helpful information;* Managing cultural differences;* Identifying and improve a BATNA;* Identifying and manage tactics;* Building appropriate relationships;* Resolving problems;* Creating opportunities for new value;* Making agreements that can survive common ups and downs when implemented;* Understanding the lifecycle of negotiations;* Engaging in a mutually successful negotiation in which all parties are satisfied, and you have not unnecessarily given away value.Chapter 1 – What do you Want to get from Negotiations? Distributive and Integrative “What are you trying to get?”  This is a key overall question to answer before beginning the planning and talking.  Your answer is likely to be “as much as possible” or “best result for all” or a combination of these two.  The following two concepts are fundamental to understanding negotiation and how negotiators think.Distributive perspective.  Negotiators try to dominate the other party because they believe they are in direct conflict with the other party over limited resources.  Negotiators in a distributive situation fight hard for their positions (specific prices or amounts) because their loss is the other side’s gain.  The negotiators believe there will be a clear winner and loser, but not multiple winners.Adapted from Metcalf & Bird, 2004
Integrative perspective.  Negotiators … believe that all parties can win through mutually beneficial solutions.  Integrative negotiators take a problem-solving approach, putting focus on exchanging information in order to identify underlying issues and interests and to generate outcomes that benefit all parties.  Negotiators reach agreement by employing creative problem-solving approaches to develop solutions that increase the benefits available to everyone.  Adapted from Metcalf & Bird, 2004Distributive thinking is useful when you must get a certain amount of limited resources for your side.  In most real world business situations, however, this kind of thinking will block you from creating and sharing maximum mutual value.Integrative thinking is useful in complex situations where you need to connect many issues and when you want to maximize the opportunities for value.  these negotiations are probably mainly distributive a) A renter and landlord negotiating the rental price of an apartment.b) Deciding how Yumi, Ken, and Jun will share the last piece of cake.c) A football star working out a salary with the team’s managers.Q3: Which of these negotiations are probably “integrative”?	_____a) Buying a car.b) Arranging a meal and price for your hiking club (40 people).c) Buying snacks in the outdoor market.d) Developing the annual financial budget of a city with 2 million inhabitants.Once there were two little boys and one old broken bicycle.  Each one wanted the bicycle; they could not agree to share it.  Eventually they started talking…they learned that one wanted the old tires to make a catapult, and the other wanted the body to make pipes.  Integration of their needs and interests made it possible to distribute everything successfully.Another basic way to think about negotiation is Claiming and Creating Value.  * When you claim value, you are aiming for the left side of Figure 1 as a distributive negotiator.  Claiming value means getting as much as possible of limited resources.* When you create value, you are aiming for the right side of Figure 1…and beyond.  Creating value is certainly integrative, you must bring many issues together, even issues not planned for the negotiation, to create new value.* Example of creating new value A manufacturer and a distributor were negotiating a typical limited distribution agreement.  After some discussions, they agreed to have the distributor make a small change to products sold in one region.  Therefore, the manufacturer sold more products and the distributor gained value-added work.  Both sides created new value together, beyond their plans for “typical distribution”.  It is a good habit to think about opportunities for creating new value from the start of a negotiation, even during the early planning phases.  Movius and Susskind (2009, pp 180-181) include a checklist for new value creation such as looking for different ways that the parties value the same issue, joint use of resources, differences in risk tolerance, and additional issues to add to the core transaction.  Following the ideas of Movius and Susskind, negotiators should look for opportunities to create new value in the gaps where the parties cannot easily match their abilities, viewpoints, values, or resources.  For example, a party which sees no value in retail sales may be happy to let another party with distribution skills handle some retail work.  Along the way, parties should look for new value opportunities where skills, interests, viewpoints, and abilities overlap.  For example, if both parties are good at an activity, they could bring their teams together to share best practices and gain efficiency.Section TerminologyIntegrate: combine various information, needs, and goals.Resources: things used to conduct business such as time, money, equipment, staff, etc.  Tangible: physical things you can touch (money, equipment, products, etc.)Intangible: non-physical things (brand, reputation, feelings, etc.)Section Summary:Most negotiations include sharing finite limited resources (distributive) that are connected with more complex, tangible or intangible issues (integrative). Choosing the StrategyFive broad negotiation strategies: accommodate, collaborate, compromise, avoid, and compete, are described by Lewicki, Hiam, and Olander (1996) in their well-known graphic: HighAccommodation Give in to the other side to build relationshipCollaborationExpand the pie for creative win-win solutions Importance of Relationship CompromiseSplit the pie to satisfyat least the minimal needsof each partyLowAvoidanceNot negotiating; Leave things as is CompetitionWin at the expense of the other partyLow		Importance of Substance 	   HighLewicki, Hiam & Olander (1996)Negotiators use the figure above to decide which approach is best.  The figure only deals with two dimensions: importance of substantive outcome (tangible and intangible gains that are at the center of a negotiation) and importance of relationship.  These ideas make a useful starting point for considering the whole negotiation, and each issue within the negotiation.  However, in addition to the relationship and substance, there are many other factors that may have an impact on choosing the negotiation strategy.  The following list of factors is adapted from Lewicki, et al. (1996) as well as Ware (1980).  These should be taken into consideration when choosing strategies.  They include psychological, social, technical, and contextual factors.  These additional factors are flexible and changeable, so reassessing these factors as the negotiation develops will help you adjust strategies to match the situation.Table 1.1 Changeable factors surrounding a negotiationResources* Scarcity of time, money, manpower, skills, and other resources needed for execution of an agreement;* Need to allocate resources precisely.Among the negotiating parties* Mutual respect among the negotiators;* Personality of the negotiators;* Empathy among the negotiators;* Team internal relationships; * Trust among the negotiators;* Physical environment;* Procedural matters; * Negotiator skill level.Environment around the negotiating parties* Complexity of issues;* Political and regulatory environment;* Importance of maintaining a good relationship;* Relative power of the parties;* Uncertainty surrounding issues;* Pressure from stakeholders;* Limited time for negotiating;* Importance of outcomes.It is helpful to select a few of the factors above to guide your choice of strategy.  Since the factors above are relative, and not absolute, we can assess them as roughly high, low or medium.  Plotting the selected factors on a scale from 0-5 allows a visual determination of the most suitable strategy.  For this purpose, variables such as: time, resources, relationship, power, trust, skills and complexity can provide an overview of the negotiation.  A negotiation with high scores for many of the factors, such as the one mapped by the solid line in the figure above, matches well with a collaborative strategy.  A negotiation with mostly low scores, such as mapped by the dotted line, is best handled with a competitive strategy.Urgency, stakes, chance of success, and relationship Another way to choose a strategy is to consider urgency, stakes, and relationship.  Urgency refers to the speed with which the organization hopes to complete the negotiation.  Stakes refers to the importance of the outcome, for example, high stakes might mean survival or failure of the organization.  Low stakes, however, means little impact on the organization.  Relationship refers to the quality of the existing relationship.To use the graphic above, consider the three categories in order from left to right for each issue or for the overall negotiation.  Follow the arrows based on your evaluation of the urgency, stakes, and relationship.  For example, if the urgency is low and stakes are low, there is no reason to immediately deal with the issue.  If there is enough time (low urgency) and the issue is important (high stakes) and the quality of the relationship is medium, look for compromises.  Changing your strategy appropriately – staying flexibleA negotiation might move from competitive to collaborative as the parties interact more.  For example, trust might increase, more time might become available, the importance of the relationship might change and so on.  Because integrative, collaborative negotiations tend to create more value for all parties, it is best to attempt to move a negotiation from competitive to collaborative.However, a collaborative negotiation can break down into a competitive one as deadlines approach and parties feel the pressure of time.  Many negotiations include issues demanding collaborative/integrative approaches as well as ones that are more distributive.  Therefore, it may be useful or necessary to switch strategies.  Ware (1980) suggests separating the approaches in time and space with appropriate sequencing and packaging.  Reasons a factor might change from distributive to integrative or reverse.  Table 1.2 How negotiation factors changeFactorsPossible sources of changeResources* Time, money, manpower, skills, and other resources needed for execution of an agreement;* Need to allocate resources with precision.* Deadlines may become more flexible;* Labor costs decrease/increase;* Highly skilled staff is recruited or lost;* Scope and funding change.Among the negotiating parties* Mutual respect among the negotiators;* Personality of the negotiators;* Empathy among the negotiators;* Team internal relationships; * Trust among the negotiators;* Physical environment;* Procedural matters; * Negotiator skill level.* New staff;* Team dynamic improves or breaks down;* Counterparties know each other better;* Skills improve;* New location/venue is agreed;* Procedures become more comfortable/difficult;* Negotiators link or delink issues in the negotiation to make them more or less flexible.Environment around the negotiating parties* Complexity of issues;* Political and regulatory environment;* Importance of maintaining a good relationship;* Relative power of the parties;* Uncertainty surrounding issues;* Pressure from stakeholders;* Limited time for negotiating;* Importance of outcomes.* Regulations become more friendly or more difficult;* Political support or pressure from the back table increases/decreases;* New technology simplifies or complicates matters;* Power changes;* Knowledge and understanding increase/decrease;* Time constraints expand or contract;* Stakes increase or decrease.Handling problem solving first in the overall sequencing of a collaborative or mixed strategy negotiation is preferable, as discussed in Chapter 4.  Without an idea about the possible solutions before taking on the competitive issue, the chance of confusing the negotiation partners and souring the communication increases.  PowerThere are three kinds of power in a business negotiation, BATNA power, coercive power, and perceived power.  BATNA power is described in Chapter 3 and it consists of the ability to walk away if a deal is not attractive enough.  Coercive power is rarely experienced in the business world in countries with sound legal systems. Often this kind of power comes from organizations or individuals in authority that can demand bribes or threaten serious consequences with no danger to themselves.  Coercive power may also come from organizations that have a monopoly.  Monopoly, or near monopoly, organizations have the unbeatable BATNA that counterparties cannot choose to walk away.  An example would be a government monopoly on a natural resource such as Precious Minerals Marketing Corporation in Ghana, which is the sole legal purchaser of the output of small gold mines.  There is no legal alternative to compliance with their demands.  The last kind of power, perceived power, comes from the perception that one side has a dominant position.  One party may promote the idea that they are powerful, but the “power” can only have impact if the other party believes it and reacts to it.  In other words, this kind of power is only real if others believe it.  Parties with this kind of "power" might include a company that is dominant in its industry and so well respected that suppliers and partners do not want to challenge it.  An example can be found in the 2014 dispute between Amazon and some publishers (i.e. Hachette) in which Amazon controls the retail market so well that they can make demands without reacting to counteroffers.  In some parts of the world, major firms can successfully exercise perceived power based on their size, history, or position in the industry.  The smaller companies that supply and serve them may make statements like, "We cannot resist the will of that company because they helped found the country." Or, "We must agree with that company because they were founded by the king's brother decades ago."  However, it is of course possible to resist such companies.  In order to fight back against any form of power, a company must show how its product or services are necessary to the "powerful" company as well as how they are different from and better than the competition.  Another way to fight back of course is to improve your BATNA so that you create alternatives and escape the power of the other party.  In the end, a strong BATNA will be the most help in dealing with any kind of power brought by a counterparty.  	 When not to Negotiate at AllAlways negotiate?There is a widespread idea that we must always negotiate if possible. That even if there is no chance of a satisfying resolution, we must still always meet, talk, exchange opinions and information, and attempt to find resolution. However, there are certainly situations in which one party will not be interested in making a resolution that is not intolerable for the other party. Is talking, exchanging opinions and information, and attempting to find resolution useful? Is it even negotiating? Is it wise and sensible?To answer these questions it is useful to differentiate the kinds of interactions are negotiations, and what might be similar interactions. To do this, I use a series of questions, an algorithm, the leads to outputs which include negotiation.The first question when you aim to talk about a topic and negotiate is whether or not there is any intent by the parties to agree. If the answer to this is yes, there will be some form of negotiation which may or may not lead to resolution. If the answer is no, the next question to ask is whether the talks are in good faith or not. If not, then the kind of discussions will be only related to information seeking, delaying, seeding disinformation, distracting, spying, and so on. Such activities may be ethical or unethical, useful to one party or even useful to all. However, inexperienced or unsuspecting negotiators may find themselves victimized by others. If the talks or proposals to talk are in good faith, there may be useful outcomes, even without intent to make an agreement, such as contacts made, relationships improved, and general information exchanged. The two main questions must follow the order proposed above: first intent then good faith. This way the intent is clear but the agreements and process may be competitive and distributive and not with guarantees or even expectation of mutual success or survival. Thus, competitive negotiations and agreements are to be expected based on issues than good faith. Reversing the order would confuse whether the negotiations are ill intended but expected to complete or simply ill intended interactions. In conclusion, negotiators should actively attempt to assess the intent and good faith of counterparties. If there are not clear signs of good faith, negotiators should be cautious in their revelations, mindful of time constraints, and the purpose of interactions and information received. This is particularly true where there are long standing disagreements or conflicts. In such cases, the decision to talk or not may depend on the negotiator’s preference to avoid or engage in delays, disinformation efforts, and so on. Thus, “always talk” is may not be a wise, considered response to counterparties.Some negotiations should not happen.  These include for example negotiations about issues where both sides have low interest and cost is high and there is no expected value in the relationship.Decision timeNegotiate: The other party in the negotiation, the translator, refused to talk.  The translator had successfully drawn in a powerful ally, AAT, and seemed to have their full support.  Court: Assembling the evidence against the translator would be easy.  However, judges are specialists in law, not linguistics.  An expert witness would cost an additional $500-1,000.  Indeed, a single plane ticket would cost at least $500.  A lawyer’s services would cost $2,000-3,000.  Of course, the problem might not be resolved in just one visit.  With experts and AAT weighing in, the court case could have gone either way, a victory or a loss.Give up: Giving up would cost only $500 and take no time at all.  There would be no concern about losing the court case and paying the costs of the other side.  After considering the situation described in the graphic above, the project manager, with the agreement of the owner of the translation services company, gave up.  The fee was paid despite the fact that the product delivered was worthless.  Do you think the project manager and owner made the right decision?  Why?________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 – First Connections  Gaining and Giving InformationAbove we encountered two basic approaches, distributive and integrative.  Distributive negotiators do not need to learn much about the other party – therefore they typically ask only a few questions with a narrow focus and share little information about themselves.  Integrative negotiators on the other hand ask many questions.  They share much (perhaps even all) information about their positions.  This section is about how questions for information may be asked and answered.  Table 3 below provides an example: Tanba Agro is negotiating sale and delivery of eggs to Hyogo Cake factory.  Table 2.1 Constructive sharing of informationDialog CommentHyogo Cake: So basically, we need 3,000 eggs per day.Tanba Agro: OK!!“OK!!” means Tanba Agro understands, not that B has committed to anything.  Tanba Agro knows they cannot deliver the eggs all at once because of truck availability.  Tanba Agro: Your factory has an interesting process…do you use all the eggs at once?Tanba Agro changes subject without showing the difficulty on his side by asking a general question about the factory, the process, or other topic related to the cake business.Hyogo Cake: No, we have three baking batches per day.  Each time we need 1,000 eggs.  Batches start at 8 AM, 11 AM, and 2 PM.Tanba Agro: I see.  Is it difficult to keep all those eggs until you are ready?Hyogo Cake: Yes – it takes a lot of space.Now Tanba Agro knows it might be possible to deliver the eggs at two or three times during a work day.  Tanba Agro also now knows that Hyogo Cake might like to have the eggs arrive at three times.  Tanba Agro can use this information to save money …Hyogo Cake: However the price is too high for us.  XYZ, Corp. can deliver the eggs all at 8 AM 3% cheaper.Tanba Agro: If you can take the eggs at 7:45, 10:45 and 1:45, we can decrease our offer by 2%.…or to offer Hyogo Cake a discount…note that Tanba Agro’s discount does not have to be as big as XYZ’s because the delivery schedule is convenient for Hyogo Cake.Types of QuestionsSimon Hazeldine, a UK business negotiator, writes that you will need to use four kinds of questions: closed, probing, open ended, and summarizing.  Closed Questions:These simple questions seek specific answers to specific questions.  You can ask for Yes/No answers.  (Hazeldine, 2006, pg 63)Probing Questions:In 3D Negotiating, Lax and Sebenius say, “If they don’t like the concept, probe.  Ask why? Why not X instead? What if Y? then, listen actively.” (Lax and Sebenius, 2006, pg 77.)Hazeldine (2006) has this to say about probing questions.These are used to explore a point the other party has made. They allow you to drill further into what has been said so that you can understand it in more detail.  Examples include:“What makes you say that?”“In what way do you think…?”“How do you mean?”“Why did you bring that up?”A useful probing technique sis to use “echo questions”. An echo question is where you use the last word or few words of the other party says as a probing question.  An example: “We need a significant investment.” “Significant investment?”In this example, you are probing further to discover how the other party defines “significant investment”. Bare Knuckle Negotiating, Hazeldine (2006), pg 64In the text below, Hazeldine suggests also using broader questions that invite general exchanges of information.Open QuestionsThese are broad, diagnositc questions that encourage the other party to talk about their situation.  Open questions usually start with words such as what, when, why how, where, who, which and usually result in a multi-word or sentence answer.  Examples would include:    “What do you want to change about your current situation?”    “You have mentioned you have some concerns.  What are they?”Open questions are used to gather information, and closed questions are used to clarify what you discover and to get specific answers and commitments.  Hazeldine (2006), pg 64Ask open question in these situations especiallyat the beginning of negotiations and when you are unclear about a general ideaAsking questions to identify problem pointsUse the inconsistency trap to learn about the other side and their understanding of the issues.How it works: Ask, then listen.  Then rephrase the question and ask again.  Compare the answers to each other and to your sources of information to look for points that you do not understand.  These points maybe difficult to understand because information is poorly explained, the counterparties have hidden the information, or because they have not noticed the need for the missing information.  Questions in order to understand interests: use Chunking Questions Katz and McNulty (1995) “If you had what it is you want, what would it do for you?”Also: "Why exactly do you want xyz?" and "What would you do if got xyz?" “What do you see as the benefits of having xyz?” “What do you think the counterparties would gain from having xyz?”Section TerminologyProbe: to explore and push for deeper, specific information.  Commit: agree to expend money, time and other resources with full intent to complete.Diagnostic question: a question for learning general information.Inconsistency: information that is not the same as it was when first presented.  Section Summary:Ask questions to gain information and build your understanding.   Relationships In the previous section we saw how a negotiator can ask questions to learn about the overall situation, the needs of the other person and find ways to improve an offer in order to increase the likelihood of agreeing.  Asking questions and answering questions can also help build a relationship.  Fundamentally, negotiations should lead to a successful business transaction or avoidance of a bad one.  But just completing one transaction is not the greatest success.  The negotiation partners could benefit from building a relationship of confidence and mutual accessibility that leads to more transactions in more areas of business – that is real success.  We can arrive at "real success" through relationships built on reciprocity, empathy, and understanding interests.  Reciprocity through getting and giving When someone tells you something, shares information with you, or gives you something, you should give something in return.  This is called reciprocity.  Returning information or some helpful action will build and improve the relationship among the parties (Cellich & Jain, 2004).  Sharing information often helps build confidence and relationships while providing the information necessary to create a good result.Sharing information is the most common way of building relationships through reciprocity when working with companies culturally rooted in the “western” world.  Other parts of the world find reciprocity and build relationships through giving gifts.  The gift may be an item such as expensive wine or a local specialty or by doing the other parties a favor.  In business negotiations, it may be a concession given early in the talks.  Giving the gift or concession or doing the favor places a burden on the other parties to respond similarly.  Just as with shared information, the pressure to respond appropriately is strong, and failing to respond appropriately may damage the relationship.  This kind of interaction based on gifts and favors is part of the concept of guanxi in China, ongi and kankei in Japan, and may be familiar to many in the cultures of East and Southeast Asia in particular.When dealing with a culture you are unfamiliar with, use very knowledgeable local people to help you prepare for the kind of reciprocity in that region.  The following quote from Thams, Liu, and von Glinow (2013, pg 466) is on target: “…although there might be some universal principles governing reciprocity, people in different cultures embrace reciprocity differently;” Reciprocity decreases tension An air of tension can also be created by unknown factors.  For example, you may never have met the people you will be negotiating with before, and this can lead to feelings of uncertainty.  You can reduce the tension by remembering that your key focus…is to find out what the other party wants, and to communicate what you want.  Bare Knuckle Negotiating, Hazeldine (2006), pg 60However, if one party gives a small concession and expects a much better concession in return, the relationship and the negotiation will deteriorate (Cellich & Jain, 2004).  If you have been given a small concession and feel pressure to give a larger concession in return, you must either get another concession, or carefully consider the size and value of the concession you might give.  Positive reciprocity can help the constructive exchange of information and ideas.  Negative reciprocity (i.e.  responding aggressively to aggressive actions) results in unequal sharing, damaged relationships, and failed negotiations.  Reciprocity, whether based on exchanging information or placing obligations on other parties, works because it is a widely accepted “norm”.  Under usual conditions, most people and organizations will share information cautiously at first, and then more openly.  The sharing is a process that builds trust and confidence.  Be a little cautious: it is possible for a negotiation partner to abuse the reciprocity process.  If the other side does not share, then you should consider a different approach or a different partner.  You must be sure that the other side is sharing quality information and concessions.  If you give too much too soon, you may learn too late that your negotiation partner is not working with you constructively.  Let's go beyond understanding needs to understanding interests.  To do so we need empathy – the ability to recognize feelings and thinking of others.  We can use empathy to understand the reasons for the choices made by counterparties.  Section Summary:Reciprocity helps build relationships and make them deeper.  Relationships improve business outcomes.	 Empathy Tough or with feeling?
Many people feel that they must choose between being assertive and being empathic – being “hard” or being “soft.” But that’s a false choice.  Showing empathy about your counterpart’s interests, perceptions, and constraints may make him or her more open to providing you with useful information.  The more empathically you understand your counterpart, the more effectively you can design value-creating deals and the better positioned you are to claim a full share of that value.  3D Negotiating, Lax & Sebenius, pg 216Empathy is a way to improve negotiation outcomes by: * Understanding the negation partner's values;* Increasing mutual gains and satisfaction;* Avoiding ethics errors.Understanding leads to improved results, possibly for all sides.  Your values may be different from the values of the other sides in the negotiation.  Using empathy, you can identify the differences and perhaps more easily create solutions that protect your values as well as theirs.  If the other sides cannot protect their values, they are more likely to leave the negotiation or seek new partners for future projects.  Assertiveness is often an opposite behavior to empathy.  Assertiveness means putting pressure on the other sides to accept your position.  Assertiveness of this sort may damage a negotiation by limiting the opportunities for other or all sides to make gains together.  Assertiveness also means getting your ideas into the conversation.  Failing to get your ideas on the table will not benefit any parties.  As empathy and understanding increases, the negotiation partners will have more opportunities to maximize mutual gains, not just their own gains.  As the gains of all sides increase, satisfaction is likely to increase.Importantly, empathy can help you avoid ethical mistakes like improperly explaining risks or value related to the negotiation or inappropriately taking an asset that has particularly high value attached to it by one of the other negotiation partners.  Empathy in some cultures may include additional generally positive feelings.  For example, in Japan, businesspeople are often sensitive to the feeling of en (?), also called wetto, a notion of compatibility, likability, and vague potential for good results (De Mente, 2004).  This feeling can impact business decisions including negotiations, contracts, and follow up.  The feeling of en is part of Japanese empathy and therefore part of relationship building in Japan.  Sensitivity to creating and building culturally specific kinds of empathy is important for cross cultural negotiators.  There are many ways to build empathy, but negotiators must be careful to do it in ways that match the expectations of the other sides.  Nonetheless, a commonly used approach is to show that you share identities with the other parties.  Some identities that are widely shared including being parents, sports interests, field of study, employment history, and so on.  Research has found that empathy tends to increase shared gains (Galinsky, Maddux, Gilin & White, 2008).  In summary, it sounds like empathy is a great thing to develop!But it is possible for empathy to create too much sympathy?  After all, you might not want to explain to your boss or your shareholders that you left resources unclaimed out of sympathy for the other side.Section Summary:Empathy understanding the interests and values of the other party.  It helps create positive value and improves the outcome of the negotiation.  It is not appropriate however to become to too understanding.  Why build relationships?“Each side of the relationship should be developing plans that incorporate the other’s interests into those plans.  Without doing so, a long-term relationship entails the disadvantage of closing off options, without accruing the benefits of the longer term commitment” (Sheppard, 2003).Which sentence best summarizes the above paragraph? _____a) Long-term relationships must be carefully limited to avoid troubles.b) Help the other side make their plans successful so that you can keep useful options available in the future.c) Be sure to think long term so you can negotiate more in the future. Image ManagementAt the start of your relationship with the other parties in a negotiation, and at later times, you may want to manage or control the image they have of you.  You can manage the image that you project in a variety of ways.  Communication of your image happens on three levels: to the organization (macro); to other teams (meso); and to other individuals (micro).  It is of course possible to make a different impression on each level, and to change your approach as the relationship develops.  Some general approaches to impression management at the team and individual levels are discussed below.  Table 2.2 Impression management approachesApproachAdvantagesDisadvantagesTough GuyOther parties may decrease their expectations from the start.  Other parties may react with similar tough behavior, leading the negotiations directly into deadlock or poor outcomes.  See the section on Playing the hard card first in Chapter 7.Nice GuyInteractions start with a positive tone.  Positive moves tend to be rewarded with positive responses.  May lead the aggressive parties to increase their demands if they feel the first impression or overall image is "soft".  TechnicalShows a willingness to consider technical issues and complex solutions.  If the other parties are not strong on technology, they may become less comfortable with your side.TrustingOther parties may share their information more confidently.  A better information flow may help you make strategies and decisions.  It may also lead to better relationships.  Counterparties may try to take advantage if they think you are naive.  CautiousOther sides may be cautious about making high demands.Other parties may not share information or may not make matching concessions if they feel you are too cautious.CorporateA highly professional attitude may make others feel confident in your abilities.Some parties present themselves as anti-establishment and may feel threatened by a strongly corporate look.Professional NegotiatorIf you use negotiating terminology like BATNA, reserves, and so on, other trained negotiators will identify you as a trained negotiator.  Shared vocabulary will make communication easier and more successful.Untrained parties may misunderstand your terminology or feel uncomfortable.  The result maybe poor communication.  FlexibleBeing flexible signals that you are willing to solve problems creatively.  May signal that you are indecisive and can be bullied.Inflexible No clear advantage.Other parties may not propose creative ideas if they expect you to reject them.  Presenting yourself and your organization to other organizations, the macro level, is generally the task of the marketing and public relations specialists in your organization.  If you do not have these people on your staff, carefully coordinate your macro level impression management with the top managers and partners.  In addition to managing the impression you make on other parties, you will need to analyze the way your negotiation partners and teammates present themselves.  Section Summary:Be aware of impressions and perceptions to manage how others feel toward you. Satisfaction	In this section we are discussing satisfaction as a feeling or emotion that a negotiator has gotten a suitable deal, not just the minimal tangible satisfaction of their requirements.No sensible party will agree to outcomes that are poor or unsatisfying.  What is the value of satisfaction?  If we can show that a negotiator can be satisfied with a deal that has less value than a "perfect" deal, it means that the negotiator will trade tangible value for their own intangible satisfaction.  Therefore, a skillful negotiator will seek to build intangible satisfaction while keep some extra tangible value.  Clearly, we can only manage this in integrative negotiations but not in purely distributive negotiations.  What is the future after satisfaction comes into a deal?  According to Curhan et al. (2006), individuals who were very satisfied just after a negotiation were more likely later to intend to continue the business relationship.  Objective measures (such as tangible outcomes) had no impact on plans to continue a business relationship or not!  Therefore, the benefit of making the other sides feel satisfied is not only (possibly) increased tangible gain, but a greater chance of future deals.  The value of future deals?  Possibly unlimited! Curhan, Elfenbein, and Xu, (2006) described four ways to view the development of satisfaction in a negotiation: * how the negotiation made us feel about ourselves, * whether the negotiation process seemed fair, * whether we've developed a productive working relationship with our counterparts, and* measurable gains and losses.  The first three in the list above can only be described as feelings; these are subjective.  Because they are subjective and difficult to measure, a skillful negotiator can actively influence those feelings.  Regarding the last item in the table above, measurable issues, it may be necessary to show that these have been distributed appropriately among the negotiating parties.  Be prepared to demonstrate fairness.  However, humans tend to attach emotional value even to things that are concretely measurable and countable, so it may be possible to influence feelings about these "facts" despite demonstrating the actual breakdown.  Section Summary:Try to build satisfaction into the negotiating process because it is more likely to lead to future business opportunities than if you simply exchange concessions.Relationship building at the tableAt the beginning of this Section, we read Lax and Sebenius’ idea that empathy is almost necessary for creating new value and successful negotiation.  Do you and your partners agree?  But specifically, what can we do at the negotiating table?  Someday you may have the experience of suddenly going into a negotiation situation with counterparts you do not know.  In that case….be friendly.- Smile, but show earnest intent (smiling is not appropriate in all business cultures)- Make small talk (choose appropriate topics)- Listen carefully to their small talk (show respect)- Learn about them (listen carefully, build empathy, take their perspective)- Ask them questions (listen to the answers and learn)- Share information (start the reciprocity process, communicate visually and verbally)Swaab et al. (2002) found in their research that using visualizations (graphics, diagrams, animations) increased satisfaction among negotiating parties, therefore, communicate using graphic images.  Active listening is the term widely used for good listening skills.  Active listening requires showing that you are listening by reacting with the appropriate verbal and body language signals.  In some cultures, this might mean the correct use of interjections, for example ah, uh huh, mm, so? and similar words when suitable.  Body language response might include nodding, leaning forward, eye contact, etc.  However, these signals of active listening are a little different around the world.  Try to use learn the correct ones for the people you are interacting with.  To summarize, negotiators need to listen and ask and listen again in order to build relationships.  That process can happen away from the negotiating table and outside the office experience, before and after the actual negotiating.Never hesitate to talk to a person and listen to them.  With most Europeans, North and South Americans, and people from many other cultures, you can walk directly to a person, greet them and talk.  In other parts of the world where behavior is more formal, adjust your approach to the standard local behaviors.  Game TheoryIn the well-known Prisoner’s Dilemma game, there are two strategies: cooperate or defect.  If the game is repeated, both sides easily see the value of cooperating.  Cooperation leads to greater value for all parties.  The same is true in negotiation – if one side shares information and the other side shares information, both will find that sharing information is rewarding.  The rewards are: creation of knowledge and trust as well as increased opportunities to create new value.Trust is the expectation that other parties will not defect.  Developing trust means an evolution of events that lead to trust.  That evolution can happen in the pattern of the following graphic.
Chapter 3 – Core Negotiation Concepts  Anchoring EffectThe anchoring effect is explained by Lax and Sebenius (2006) in 3D Negotiating, pages 187-190.  They found that experienced professionals receiving the same information, except for price, would suggest prices close to the first offer from the other party, even if their previous price info was very different.  Therefore, Lax and Sebenius conclude that the first party to suggest a price gains an advantage.  The authors also say that the price proposed must seem reasonable to the other parties because an excessive price would make the proposer seem foolish.  Additionally, providing a clear compact reason for the price at the time you propose it may strengthen the anchoring effect.  Practical conclusion: try to be the first party to propose a price, however the price should not be outrageous and should include some reason or explanation.  Lax and Sebenius, (2006, page 187) say, “…make an offer just above the most they’d be willing to pay.”  Then, you can move down without losing much of the potential total value.Example: The author used to work for a business research company that specialized in Russian (then Soviet) business (in 1989-1992).  We had to negotiate prices for market research and information.  If we were expecting a price between $5,000 and $8,000, we were shocked to hear an offer of $14,000.  The offering party seemed foolish to us and we would look for another provider.  With time, we learned to start the conversation with a low, but still reasonable, price, in other words a moderate anchor.  Q: What if you cannot anchor the price conversation?A: Anchoring has its biggest effect on negotiators who are not aware of it.  If you are aware of the anchor, you can re-anchor with your preferred price range.  You can try to re-anchor immediately, or later.  You can do it bluntly or by linking issues that explain why your new anchor is sensible.Section Summary:Try to name the price first.  This point is not important if the price range is limited or if price is a low priority issue.   BATNAThe abbreviation BATNA means “Best Alternative to Negotiated Agreement” and is also called a “No-Deal Option”.  BATNA is what you will/must do because of failing to negotiate an agreement.  Before you start negotiating, it is important to know what will happen if the negotiation collapses: Will you go bankrupt?	Will the other side go bankrupt?Will you get fired?	Will the other party get fired?Do you have another possible partner?	Do they have another possible partner?Do you have time to find a new partner? 	Do they have time to find a new partner?Can either party do the work/create the product alone?The answers to the questions above help you to understand the BATNAs of the parties.  Prepare before the negotiation starts to understand what the negotiation choices are so you can have the best possible BATNA.  A typically strong BATNA could be having an alternative company to negotiate with.    Example: Company X makes electronic toys and wants a faster chip, but company Y only sells faster chips for an extremely high price.  In this case, X must walk away.  Also, Y must walk away.  This is clearly a failure for both!  We hope that X had already started talking with another chip maker.  We hope that Y had already started talking with another electronics maker.Sometimes there may be more than one possible alternative to negotiating.  In that case it makes sense to consider which alternatives are better or worse.  Identifying your Worst Alternative to Negotiated Agreement (WATNA) may be helpful in avoiding that result and assessing the importance of negotiating; another approach is thinking about the Most Likely Alternative to Negotiated Agreement (MLATNA), Fisher and Ury (1991).  The "most likely" result is more specific than the general notion of BATNA and can help you eliminate "best" results from your planning that might really be unlikely.  BalanceIn any negotiation, you and the other parties involved face a fundamental and ongoing choice: between staying and walking…This is the deal/no-deal balance.  On one side of the balance you have the proposed deal; on the other, you have your “walk away option” … or BATNA.3D Negotiating, pg 27 (Lax and Sebenius) It is extremely important to know (or estimate) the BATNA of the other negotiator(s).  Is their BATNA so strong that they can walk away from the negotiating table?  Is it very weak?  If they have a weak BATNA, you should be able to improve your negotiating results.   Reserve PointAs well as knowing the alternatives to negotiating, it is necessary to know the point at which you must stop negotiating and use your BATNA.  That point is the reserve point, also called the walk away point.  For example, in a simple sales negotiation, the lowest price the selling party will take is their reserve point.  The highest price the buying party is willing to pay is their reserve point.  Every issue, not just price, should have a reserve point.  This is the point where you must stop talking.  Sometimes the reserve point is the same as an offer from another party (your BATNA).  The reserve point is not the target point – the target is what you would like to get.  The reserve point is something you have to get.  Generally, you hope to get a better outcome than the reserve point.For example, if you are planning to reserve hotel rooms for a company event, you need to have a limit to how much you will spend.  Your manager or accounting department may give you that limit, or you may set it yourself.  If you do not have a limit, you may accidentally pay higher prices when you could have negotiated lower prices.  The notion of not being able to exit a project that is developing poorly is described in the Japanese context by DeMente (2004, pages 21-22).  According to DeMente, Japanese organizations may find quitting to be too upsetting and therefore they feel forced to commit resources even after failure has become obvious.  For more about strategic negotiation errors, see Appendix IV.  Section Summary:Develop a strong BATNA so that you can leave a negotiation that is not going well.  We mentioned “interests” before, but what does it mean?  Interests are what the parties want and care about based on their basic goals for the negotiation.  But those interests are not usually simple, one-word things.  They have to include the related items and conditions that make the interests possible (Dupont, 1993).  That means the interests can be complicated and may include many indirectly connected issues.  That means, of course that good negotiators have to spend extra time to understand how to satisfy the goals of the other side. We also have to consider that the other side may not know all the related issues around their own interest… in that case you may have to teach them!Section TerminologyProbe: to explore and push for deeper, specific information.  Section Summary:Learn what you and the other negotiators really want, and try to satisfy those needs.   Principle Based NegotiationPrinciple based negotiation is an approach described by Ury and Fisher in their 1991 book “Getting to Yes”.  The approach proposes that all parties focus on principle (what they generally need and want) not on positions (specific points that can or cannot be given away).  Because specific positions are essentially “win-lose”, they result in imperfect negotiations and imperfect results.  Compare the left side of the table below (positional, old-style thinking) to principle-based thinking.Ury and Fisher (1991) show us out-of-date thinking, with only two choices, neither of which is suitable:Table 3.3 Soft vs hard, Ury and FisherProblem:Bargaining based on positions: which approach?SoftFriends.Seek agreement.HardOpponents.  Seek victory.Make concessions for relationship.Be soft on the problem and people.Trust others.Demand concessions in order to start relationship.Be hard on the problem and people.Distrust others.Change your position easily.React to threats.Disclose your bottom line.Accepted one-sided losses to reach agreement.  Search for answers they will accept.  Insist on agreeing.Hold tight to your position.Make threats.Lie about your bottom line.Demand one-sided gains as the price of agreement.Search for your best and only answer.Insist on your position.Avoid contests of will.Give in to pressure.Try to win contests of will.Apply pressure.Adapted from Ury & Fisher (1991), Getting to Yes, pg 13.Ury and Fisher see a negotiation as “people talking about things they care about” and a chance to solve problems. This view is a positive starting point for progress.  The opposite view (which we will avoid) is to see a negotiation only as “a chance to get something”.  Also, Ury and Fisher highlight two points that we have read about already:- Understanding the interests of the parties.o Interests include all sorts of things: money, reputation, future opportunities, relationships, respect, lowering risk, personal feelings, and so on.- Increasing the potential benefits beyond expectations at the start of negotiations.o Finding a new activity that increases the benefits to all parties: a new area of business, blocking a competitor, developing new resources, creating a new product and so on.Additionally, they tell us to:- Separate the people from the problem- Focus on interests not positions- Invent options for mutual gain- Insist on using objective criteria Game theory:If you like thinking about game theory, you will enjoy this following discussion.  You can see that win-lose and win-win negotiating are similar to the “Prisoner’s Dilemma” game.  Win-Lose negotiating is “imperfect” with poor results for one or all parties but Win-Win negotiating is also not perfect.  Why not?  Write your ideas here.______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________It is sometimes possible to improve “pretty good” through synergy and creating new value.  Synergy opportunities allow negotiation parties to get new benefits together that they could not manage alone.  If Win-Win is not perfect, is Win-Win + new value creation a better way?  Is it perfect?______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________Go to http://money.howstuffworks.com/personal-finance/budgeting/negotiation5.htm to see another explanation of this problem.Thus, you need to look for: * Common interests* Mutual value creation* Fair sharing of value creation* SynergySection Summary:Negotiate about the key goals and principles; do not fight hard for specific positions because these may lead to dead ends and limited value sharing.  
Chapter 4 – Structure and Planning Getting to StartIf your organization is new or the reasons to talk are not clear, you can expect some difficulty in getting to the first conversation.  You may have to do some prepositioning in order to get an opportunity to interact (Stein, 1989).  Two basic approaches are useful here: * Threat, and * Overwhelming benefit.Threat works by presenting the other parties with a convincing risk of trouble that is best solved by negotiation.  Overwhelming benefit works by making the possible gains of talking seem too appealing to walk away.  In both cases, we can say that you must show that negotiating is better than the other parties’ BATNA.  ThreatThreats are a risky approach and should be used only where the stakes are high and the relationship is already damaged.  Overwhelming benefit Showing overwhelming benefit is less risky and is likely to start the relationship on a positive footing.  Negotiators can do this by presenting the benefits of their product, service or ideas in a very positive light.  Show the maximum benefit in the best case scenario that applies directly to the parties you want to interact with.  In other words, you have to successfully sell your idea to the other parties before you can negotiate the details.  When showing overwhelming benefit, you must not of course lie or misrepresent, however you may ethically show “best possible cases”.  Later, as you negotiate, all parties can develop the offers and ideas together in order to agree suitable services, prices, actions, and so on. Building Momentum Sometimes negotiations are successful because the parties develop confidence about dealing with each other.  Even negotiators on the opposite sides of difficult issues can develop trust, confidence, and empathy over time.  Having successful agreements helps to build confidence among all parties.  But how can you develop confidence the first time you negotiate a deal?  One way is to arrange the parts of the negotiation so that agreement can be reached on some easy parts early in the process.  With early successes, all parties may feel more comfortable with difficult issues later.However, it could be a serious error to manage all the easy parts first: all your work could be lost if the last points in a negotiation cannot be resolved.Advantages of linking all issues: You can integrate issues and link them together.  By the end, both sides are committed to agreeing, “no-deal” becomes increasingly less appealing.  However, be careful to avoid the error of being “in too deep” as discussed above.Another approach is to treat some or all issues separately.  You might be satisfied to resolve some, but not all, of the issues.  Advantages: Each success creates good feeling and helps the entire project; Flexibility in adapting to the other parties.To discuss with your partner – the best orderEasy issues first? 	Helps build momentum, but the last items may be too tough and process may collapse.  You may lose opportunities to integrate.  Easy things last?	 	You may resolve deepest problems early, but there is no chance to build       momentum, confidence, and successes in advance.  Is this the best way? * Put some but not all the easy items in the beginning.  * Link some issues or groups of issues to allow good integrative negotiating.* Even if you separate some issues, you should generally integrate issues where possible – do not allow all issues to become separate.  * Be flexible, choose the way most suited to that negotiation.* Be flexible, unlink and relink issues if necessary.* Agree to a rough approach (road map) with the other party.Process movesAnother way to move the negotiation is to consider process moves (Kolb & Williams, 2001) that help the parties organize issues, bring problems into the open, discuss interests, and handle interactions.  Process moves have influence on what is discussed and how.  For example, an agenda of points to discuss, encouragement to speak out, encounters away from the formal discussion table, and expert speakers are moves that may help a negotiation to progress.Section Summary:Small successes can help build relationships and confidence.  Also, after many successes and time, all sides may be less willing to give up and use their BATNA.
 3D NegotiationPreplanning is a key teaching of this textbook.  No person or team can manage a business negotiation without planning – lots of planning! You know that 3D means three dimensions.  The idea of “3D” Negotiation is for negotiators to think on three levels about any negotiation.  The three dimensions are described in the table below.  Table 4.1 Three dimensions of negotiationTacticsDeal DesignSetupAt the tableOn the drawing boardAway from the tablePeople and processValue, substance, and outcomesArchitectureBuild trust, handle hardball approaches, bridge cross cultural gaps…Create agreements that maximize value for both sides, improve on goals, are more sustainable…Determine participants, BATNA, overall sequence, choices…3D Negotiation, pg 19These dimensions do not come one after the other, they can happen at the same time or switch on and off.  However, the Setup and Deal Design dimensions mostly take place in advance of interacting with the counterparties (the Tactics dimension).  These two dimensions are largely about preparation; however, the negotiators can work on these dimensions any time.  Tasks to be done in the Setup dimension - Determine the participants in the negotiation  Decide on the best team members for your side.  Decide who will lead the team – an engineer, a sales and marketing person, a high-level manager, or another person?  What skills and personalities do you want to have in your team?  How many people should be on your team?Be sure to consider the expectations of the other side as well as the issues in the negotiation as you make these decisions.  At this point a basic stakeholder analysis is necessary.  List the key people and organizations and their main interests.  Later, complete a more thorough analysis of all stakeholders and their interests.  A thorough stakeholder analysis will be helpful for understanding the immediate surface issues as well as deeper issues.  See Appendix VI for more on this.In addition to your own personnel, you may be able to pick the people on the other sides that you will talk with.  For example, you may want to approach a key figure in a company in order to avoid a person with a bad reputation.  You may prefer to deal with someone you already know, someone who is respected in the industry, someone with a reputation for negotiating well, a high-ranking person, a very skilled engineer, or other individuals for other reasons.  In a very complex negotiation, you may want to have technical information presented by an expert individual or organization that is neutral to the negotiating parties in order to increase the knowledge of all parties.  You may be able to include or exclude some organization or individuals in advance by setting rules that other negotiation partners must agree to if they want to participate.- Determine your BATNAThoroughly investigate your alternatives to the negotiation.  The stronger your BATNA, the more negotiating room and comfort you will have.  As you investigate your BATNA, try to make it stronger.  Even if the making your BATNA stronger requires a lot of time, start the process.  - Determine the BATNAs of all partiesIt is not enough to know your own BATNA.  As discussed above in the BATNA section, you will need to know the BATNA of the other side.  Now is the time to learn about it and to weaken it.  - Overall sequence  During the early planning, you should check whether there any issues that must be resolved before other issues.  For example, it might be necessary to determine a rough timeline before agreeing to milestones for portions of a project.  Your early planning and checking might identify some issues to be done in sequence….however, once the negotiation starts, it generally best not to stick to a rigid plan.  A good negotiator reacts flexibly as new information appears.  - Approximate timing and timescale of the negotiationConsider the timing of the start and finish of the negotiation.  Some points to include in the planning:When* Calendar year (major holidays or vacation periods to avoid);* National holidays in your country and the countries of other negotiation partners;* Fiscal year (the very end of the fiscal year is usually extremely busy);* Business seasons (avoid times of year that are very busy for the other organizations).How long* Planning period on your side;* Estimated number of days, weeks, months, or years to talk; * Time constraints due to availability of resources;* Time expectations of the back table.- The back table There is a hidden partner in almost every negotiation, the "back table".  This refers to a boss or coworkers or other group that the negotiators will report to.  Even the CEO reports to someone: the board!  The back table (people or groups) is sometimes called a constituent group (Ware, 1980).  The early phase of planning is the time to be sure that you and your back table are in close understanding about all expectations, limitations, and issues related to the negotiation.  One of the limitations you must agree about with the back table is time.  Often, people who are not part of the negotiation have the expectation that everything will be resolved quickly.  The truth however is often very different.  In fact, the higher the quality of communication in the negotiations, the more likely that questions will arise requiring more research time.  Good negotiations usually mean good solutions.  Good solutions, of course, require time to develop.  The lesson is clear: you will need lots of time, maybe more than your peers and bosses expect.  Be sure to change their expectations.See Chapter 8 for more discussion about the back table.  - Research to do listDevelop a list steps for your research and a list of specific things to learn about.  Your research "to do" list will increase in size as you go on.  But the list should start by fulfilling the phrase, "Know the facts, know the people."  View the video of Dr.  Kurt Biedenkopf at http://bit.ly/1riIzdN for the comments of this experienced negotiator.  If the link does not work, visit the Youtube channel for “The Negotiation Challenge” and look for the video titled “Kurt Biedenkopf on negotiations” there.  His summary in the first twenty five seconds packs tremendous insight and power.Biedenkopf’s simple phrase, "know the facts, know the people," is a proposal to learn in detail about the negotiation issues and the people and organizations related to them.  This means knowing something about the personalities of the negotiators on the other teams.  It may be possible to learn about them in advance as well as to learn about them through interactions during the negotiations.  As for the facts…it is up to you to search every possible source, on line or not, for relevant facts and information.  Sources you might include:* Recent newspaper articles;* Old newspaper archives;* Specialist industry periodicals;* Court records;* Network of business acquaintances, friends, and family;* Government contracts;* And so on…- ChecklistDevelop a checklist of the basics that you need to achieve during negotiation.  See the next section for more info.  Section Summary:Most of the work in negotiating happens before the negotiation.  Use multiple planning methods to prepare.   Basic Planning“When preparing for a negotiation you need to prepare your negotiation shopping list.  This is a list of the things you want to get out of the negotiation.”Bare Knuckle Negotiating, Hazeldine (2006), pg 35The simplest form of planning is a checklist of things you reasonably hope to accomplish.  A checklist is a good starting point.  But we can expand a checklist easily to make it more useful.  1) make a list of results that you have to get.  These necessary items are ones that you must accomplish if the negotiation is to be better than your BATNA.  2) list the results that you would like or intend to get additionally, but that are not absolutely necessary.  3) list the things that you can reasonably trade away in order to get what you must have and want.  Use the above three categories to create a HIT list (LaFond, Vine, and Welch, 2010):H – Have to get (must have these reserve point items or you will walk away)I – Intend to getT – Trade in order to get H and I itemsThe expanded HIT list is a simplified version of the Raiffa Scorecard discussed later in this chapter.  The Raiffa Scorecard is more powerful and useful, but first we will discuss backward mapping as a way to structure and plan the negotiation.   Identifying InterestsIn this section we will go much deeper into the process of negotiation planning.  Understanding the interests of the parties is a vital step in planning.  Your notes should include your interests and what you guess or know about the other parties’ interests and goals.  …what are valid interests to include?…all sides (you and them) Please choose some interests that could be included in your notes:__ your time restrictions__ their time restrictions__ your maximum price__ their minimum price__ your most and least important issues__ relationships among their negotiators__ your long-term hopes__ recent trend of their stock price__ your ____________________________ __ their prioritiesHow to determine interestsDon't take your boss's list of preferred outcomes as the final list of your own interests, investigate all interests of all parties thoroughly.  Most business negotiations involve money, but there may be many more issues and interests.  Start with the ones in the interest grid below and add to the categories.Perspective taking as a way to identify interestsIn this approach, negotiators try to understand the goals and difficulties in a negotiation from the point of view of other sides.  However, they concentrate on the desired targets and goals more than the feelings of other sides.  Galinsky, et al. (2008, p 382) used the phrase, "Try to understand what they [the other side] are thinking in their situation."  In that research, perspective taking resulted in greater joint gains and individual gains.  Perspective taking is done with little or no interaction with the other sides, therefore it tends to result in less relationship growth and empathy.  That means there is less chance of developing a bias such as liking or disliking the other sides.  To use perspective taking effectively, consider the other party and their possible ideas about issues in the table above, the simplified interest grid, and consider the perspective the other parties may have on each interest.  The result could be a large number of perspectives!  Further research and interaction with the other parties will help you identify which are accurate or not.  Next stepsTo dig deeper into interests, Lax and Sebenius suggest these steps in 3D Negotiating, page 76:Four Practices That Help You Get Interests Right   1. Ask, listen, probe.2. Use public sources to map interests3. Get insight from internal sources4. Get insight from knowledgeable advisersWe have already discussed the first one, asking and listening.  The third one we can understand as asking people you know in your network or in your company who might have some insight or information about the other party.  The fourth one we can understand as asking professionals and consultants beyond your co-workers.  Let’s consider the second one… “public sources”.Public sources means looking widely at newspaper articles, special industry journals, newsletter, internet chat rooms, speeches, YouTube videos, books, blogs, comments by experts, SEC filings, tax information, and all other sources that are legally and publicly available.  Important: it is also possible to get information by unethical methods: misrepresenting yourself to people familiar with the other parties and the planning; stealing data; paying another person to steal data...none of these methods are acceptable in the real world of business.  These methods will damage or destroy business relationships with negotiating partners and others when discovered.  Moreover, they may result in legal troubles.Generally, you should consider all possible interests when planning for the negotiation.  In the end, you should try to make a final list with notes.  You can carry a list like this to the negotiating table with you.  See Appendix III for a planning sheet based on Brett's planning document. Backward MappingIn their book 3D Negotiating, Lax and Sebenius suggest “mapping backward” as a process for crafting the agreement and the negotiating strategy.  First, determine what your final agreement should look like.  Next, go backward towards the point where research starts by understanding the barriers to agreeing.  As you identify and understand each barrier to the agreement, you can prepare positions and offers that will make a final agreement possible.  After that planning, start interacting and talking with the counterparties and move forward to the final agreement.  Deal breakersThe processes of investigation, research, planning and especially, backward planning, should help you identify problems that are so difficult they cannot be overcome.  These may be deal breakers.  It is important to identify possible deal breakers and confirm whether or not they are unresolvable early in the process of the negotiation.  If the deal breakers cannot be resolved, they will stop the negotiation.  Leaving deal breakers until the end of the talks will result in the complete loss of time and effort invested.Deal breakers often are items that one side requires with no options for adjusting or avoiding.  In the ChinAlco Rio Tinto case described above, 18% ownership by a foreign company was a deal breaker in the eyes of one stakeholder, the Australian government.  Sometimes inexperienced negotiators feel they must gain a certain outcome and therefore they hold tight to a position.  If the position is too aggressive and the negotiator cannot be flexible, it may become a deal breaker, destroying the opportunity to complete.  Game theoryYou may recognize this backward mapping approach from Game Theory: backward induction.  Game theory shows how powerful a tool this is for choosing the right path to the outcome you want.  The process is the same: identify the possible outcomes; select the best one you can reasonably attain; understand the steps necessary to reach that outcome by working backwards through the interests and needs and positions of the other parties.  Consider your expectations as you develop the “deal you want”.  Howard Raiffa writes that even experienced negotiators generally expect better results than they really get.  Therefore, be sure that the deal you want is really acceptable to the counterparty.In the process of mapping backwards, points in the “deal you want” must not appear in “unacceptable to the other side” nor in “not agreeing”.  Compare these carefully to see if there are conflicts you must resolve before the negotiations start.You can find blanks prepared for backward mapping in Appendix III.  Appendix III contains various planning documents.  Use all of them or only the ones you feel comfortable with.Now consider the next negotiation in this class.  Please consider the final goal of your side and your counterparts.  Draw a full page “map” approximately following backward mapping from Lax and Sebenius.  Section Summary:Backwards mapping is a good tool for planning.  To use this or any other planning tool, you must know the interests of all the parties in the negotiation.   Priority and Outcome MappingIt can be confusing to track all issues and the possible outcomes.  Howard Raiffa, in his book Negotiation Analysis: The Art and Science of Negotiating offers a practical way to manage priorities and possible outcomes.  He suggests the table below to organize the interests and outcomes and he suggests using points that add up to 100 to evaluate importance of issues and the benefits of the outcomes.  A blank scorecard can be found in Appendix VIII of this booklet.  How to make and manage a Raiffa ScorecardThis scorecard is a helpful way to simplify the issues in a negotiation and easily understand the choices you might pursue or trade.  Step 1: Write down the key issues;Step 2: Weight the issues by importance with points adding up to 100;Step 3: Write down alternative possible outcomes for each issue;Step 4: Set points for each possible outcome, up to the maximum for that issue;Step 5: Consider all the points, you can now see priorities and preferences – use this information to structure your negotiation and decide what you can trade or abandon in order to get something more valuable.Step 6: As you negotiate, track the outcomes that you agree to.  Of course, you must remain flexible and adjust to new value possibilities that you may discover during the negotiation.  Practice: Fill out the scorecard below for one of the cases in this course.  Evaluating successThe Raiffa scorecard can also help evaluate success.  After a complex negotiation, it is often difficult to know if you did well or not so well.  A glance at the scorecard would show quickly the overall results.  Section Summary:Outcome mapping is a good tool for planning.  To use this or any other planning tool, you must know the interests of all the parties in the negotiation.   The Sequence of Talk at the TableAfter considering the setup and planning that must occur before talks start, we still need to understand the best sequence of events at the table.  What to discuss first?  Is there anything that should be done early on?  Or avoided?  Let’s consider the pros and cons of starting with each point.Agenda: Agreeing to the agenda is an important process that may be quite complicated.  Each party may have reasons for starting with certain issues.  Because it is complex, and possibly divisive, it is better not to start with this.Company history: Each company has its own history that helps define what it is and how it works.  This information is important to understanding interests and motivation.  However, it may be useful to first understand the people.Information sharing: The process and degree of information sharing develop with interaction.  It cannot be pushed into a first activity at a first meeting.  Instead it will occur over many meetings.Introductions and personal experience: This activity is a good way to start any meeting, especially when participants are new to each other.  This activity and small talk can mix easily together.  Some individuals and cultures will make this longer or shorter based for example on preference, rank, and comfort level.Major issues: Get to the point!  It is best not to start here as parties are likely to come directly to a conflict or deadlock.  It is important to first understand people, interests, organizations, and details in order to solve possible problems. Problem solving: This activity requires time and much information.  It cannot be completed successfully in a first meeting.  Rules and protocol: This topic is important to establish early in the relationship in order to avoid unintended false steps, insults and bruised egos.  Usually this is best placed after introductions and small talk.Small talk: A good way to start any meeting.  It helps to create a positive atmosphere and starts the flow of information sharing.  Some individuals and cultures will prefer more or less small talk.  Prepare accordingly with suitable casual topics.  Section Summary:Start face to face interactions with introductions and possibly gift exchanges and small talk.  Use these interactions to build rapport and to start the flow of information.  
Chapter 5 – Some Cultural Considerations  Top Down / Bottom UpPlease read about the two approaches below, which feels most comfortable to you?Table 5.1 Top down, Bottom upTop downThis means getting the global “large picture” goals in order before dealing with details and specific issues.  As the overall picture becomes clear, the logical path to achieving it also becomes clear.Example: generally including or excluding some areas of activity before working out details.  Bottom upThis means dealing with specifics before coming to a global conclusion.  As the specifics are discussed and agreed, they build the larger, final picture.Example: negotiating the details of an agreement (order volume, delivery time, unit price, services etc.) before coming to broader issues.Does it start from an agreement on general principles and proceed to specific items [top down], or does it begin with an agreement on specifics, such as price, delivery date, and product quality, the sum total of which becomes the contract [bottom up]? Salacuse (1998)  Neither approach is perfect or “correct”.  Be flexible and work with your counterparts and team members to view negotiations from both approaches.  Your counterparts may not even realize that they like to progress “top down” or “bottom up”.  Design your negotiation approach(es) in advance.  A good negotiator learns to design the negotiation before starting the actual negotiation meetings.  Before means “long before” because time is necessary to consider, learn, and redesign.  If you can, agree with the other party in advance about which approach to use in order to avoid misunderstandings.Cultural issues: If possible, establish the mutual starting point (top or bottom) before you arrive at the negotiating table.  In the real world, you may come to know what to expect from certain people, companies, or within a country or region.  Do people from the western part of your country prefer to start top down while people from the eastern part of your country prefer to start bottom up?  What about people from different parts of China?  Or Australia?  Or your country?  What about companies?  Does Mitsubishi (Japan) work top-down?  Does SingTech (Singapore) work bottom-up?  Always try to check first by talking to the other side or talking to people with experience.  As mentioned above, expectations may vary from country to country or company to company.  Metcalf et al. (2006) have this to say:* Build momentum with Indians by negotiating agreement on smaller issues.  * Build rapport with Finns and lay out the general themes and principles behind the negotiations Warning: In the text above, Metcalf et al. (2006) make it clear that not all Finns, Indians, Mexicans, etc., react or think the same way.  Never stereotype regarding country and culture!!  Be flexible and react to the clues you learn about your counterparties as you research and as you talk to them.  Check about the individuals in advance if possible.  If you cannot check in advance, discover their preferred approaches at the first encounter.ReviewWhich is better, top down or bottom up?  Neither one is objectively better.  However, it is generally a good idea first to explore some global issues (top down) before getting into details (bottom up).  You might start by generally agreeing the overall goal, then turn to groups of issues or individual issues.In your planning phase, long before you talk, you must consider top-down, global issues.  If you know the global picture, you may be able to more successfully link details and integrate issues.Your comments: 	___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________Section Summary:Before the negotiations, plan starting with the big picture (top down) and again starting with the details (bottom up).  Adapt flexibly to the approach the other side uses. Culture and NegotiationIn the section above, we learned from Salacuse (2004) and Metcalf et al. (2006) that negotiators from some countries have preferences in how they negotiate.  ExpectationsCulture is deeply connected to, even defined by, people's expectations of each other.  With experience, a negotiator from one cultural background, can learn the expectations of another cultural group.  With that knowledge, the negotiator can adjust behavior to come closer to the expectations of the other side.  A 2013 interview with an American business negotiator showed that Japanese business people, in his experience, were more formal than Americans, and he adjusted his behavior appropriately for them.   In the end, expectations, cultural behaviors, and actions of real people in real situations are very fluid and hard to predict.Consider a country or region that you know well.  What kind of negotiation behavior can you expect in that country?  Would it be the same in the east and west?  North and south? Culture and stereotyping – not a reliable approach“…individuals and groups within cultures may be united on some dimensions (Indians on direct communication), deeply divided or split on others (Indians on attitudes), and uncommitted on others (Finns on risk-taking).  It is no longer acceptable nor is it accurate or useful – if it ever was – for, say, an American negotiator to expect a Mexican counterpart to be relationship-oriented or an American compatriot to be contract-oriented.  Our findings point to the inherent inaccuracy of what Osland and Bird (2000) have referred to as ‘sophisticated stereotyping.’” Metcalf, et al. (2006)Short comment about stereotyping: People from one country may have some similarities…and maybe not.  You can learn about general styles and cultural preferences from “Doing Business in _____” guidebooks.  These guidebooks can help you to know practical information about gifts, general behaviors and values.   But you cannot safely apply that general information to individuals.  Do not stereotype!  What to do: Learn about the individuals and their companies in addition to learning the general behaviors of the appropriate cultural groups.Culture and LanguageWhen you are negotiating with a group from another country with a different language, you will probably interact in English.  Browaeys and Price in their 2011 textbook Understanding Cross-Cultural Management compare cultural approaches to common management issues.  They compare five areas of management: planning, organizing, staffing, directing, and controlling to eight dimensions of culture.  The dimensions are relative scales of how strongly a culture may prefer behaviors.  The relative positions of a person or a group or company on the dimensions highlights areas where people may work well together or not, in part because their expectations are met or not.  The eight dimensions of culture they discuss include: * High versus low-context;* Doing versus being;* Polychronic versus monochromic;* Future versus past orientation;* Hierarchic versus equality;* Public versus private;* Collectivist versus individualistic;* Competitive versus cooperative;Mapping one’s own expectations to those of teammates or counterparties may show how you can cooperate or where you might conflict.  If conflict is on the horizon, planning and learning and adjusting may help to avoid the conflict or even create opportunities to create a new mutually agreeable approach.  In the end, negotiations across cultures may be more time consuming than comparable negotiations within the same culture.  Brett and Okumura in 1998 showed that mutual gains were significantly lower when negotiating teams were from different cultural backgrounds.  See Appendix V for more insights on culture and negotiating.  Corporate culture You must also learn about the culture and beliefs of the businesses you will interact with.  Some business sectors have a corporate culture that sets them apart from other areas.  For example, the world of IT is known for late nights, flexible hours, casual clothing, and working intensively as projects come to a head.  On the other hand, the world of banking is better known for regular hours, working at a reasonable pace, and sticking closely to the rules of banking imposed by government or international standards.  However, inside a business sector, not all the organizations and companies may share a culture.  For example, within Japan's finance sector, Mitsui Sumitomo Bank and MUFJ have very different corporate cultures with different levels of power and flexibility given to workers.  In Korea, Samsung and Lucky Gold have very different cultures, despite being in the same industry.  Section Summary:Be aware of cultural preferences and behaviors in teams from other regions or countries, but never expect specific behavior, always be flexible and sensitive towards your counterparties. Weak/Strong Points of North American NegotiatorsUnderstanding some common failings or strong points among a group of people might help you avoid communication errors, deadlock, and failed negotiations.  In addition to gaining some insight into another group, the tables below may help describe yourself and your coworkers and counterparties within your culture.  After reading about the cultures broadly described below, try listing some strong and weak points of your cultural background with appropriate comments that will help you and others work together.  Broadly, it is possible to list some common strengths and weaknesses of negotiators from a culture.  Do not apply this data to all people from those places!  That sort of stereotyping will most likely lead a negotiator into errors.  However, it is possible to set your general expectations using this data.  The next step is to compare the reality of the people you interact with to determine if they are as described below or as described in other sources.  You can only cautiously apply the ideas about weaknesses and strengths once you understand the people involved.  As discussed elsewhere in this textbook, know the people, know the facts!
Common behaviorsIt is also wise to look for current behaviors and expectations among negotiators from a certain culture.  Research done during the writing of this textbook by the authors, shows that a large percentage (77%) of experienced business negotiators in Japan rarely or never experience haggling with other Japanese negotiators.  Therefore you might want to avoid haggling in order not to disturb a positive relationship.  Other findings regarding Japanese-Japanese business negotiations (data gathered in 2013 and 2014):- Large teams are common, i.e. four or more members (87%);- Common to develop new value during the negotiations (80%);- Positive emotions are clearly demonstrated (82%);- Progress is often made outside of the normal, formal work environment (62%);- Indirect logic, rather than direct logic is normal (100%);- Often a rush to complete before the end of the fiscal year (61%);- Threats are rarely or never made (100%);- Great care is given to the seating of the participants based on their relative rank (90%).Part of your preparation before dealing with people from another culture should be to look for information similar to the above points by reading, talking to experienced people, and communicating with people from the other culture.  Section Summary:Japanese negotiators may be indirect in communication, seeking to understand layers of issues before coming to specifics.  They are often highly patient in negotiation and well-informed about issues.  Adjust carefully to the style of the Japanese individuals and groups you work with.Women interviewed in the course of developing this textbook had various strategies for participating in business negotiation.  Some of these are included here:Table 5.9 Gender related strategiesStrategyHow it worksStart with a serious issueStart communication with technical issue or a philosophical issue to establish your credibility.  The founder of JBond in Tokyo, Ms. Saito, used this approach, instead of the usual small talk, when she was starting in the business world.  This way she could signal to upper level managers that she was a serious part of the process.Start with a display of toughnessShow that you are not soft and easy to deal with.  Do not, however, start with a very aggressive or negative style (see the section on Playing the hard card first in Chapter 7).Schedule casual events in advanceAvoid late nights and distasteful entertainments by scheduling the events and locations.  If you allow others to choose the restaurant or club, you may find they have picked unpleasant places.  Avoid extra drinking of alcohol by choosing juices or other non-alcohol cocktails as much as possible.  Make a habit of immediately asking the waiter for something you like without alcohol (good advice for male and female negotiators!).  Persistence Some older managers may not take women, especially younger ones, seriously.  A good approach is to try repeatedly to get your ideas and information out.  This may mean carefully stepping into the conversation or following up after a meeting with email, written documents, or phone calls.Formal stanceMaintain a highly professional profile using language and gesture to create an atmosphere of respect.  You can dress formally (but not fancily) and use formal posture and gesture.  Be careful, however, not to create a barrier of formal behavior – it is also important to be appropriately accessible for information sharing and joint problem solving.  Deputy US Trade Representative in Japan, Wendy Cutler, says, “Women must present themselves as firm yet pleasant.” Handover, (pg.  23, 2014).Section Summary:Gender may play itself out in a negotiation in many ways that are continuously evolving.  Female and male negotiators should remain sensitive to current thinking and constantly learn about changes in current thinking on these issues.  
Chapter 6 – Talking the Talk The phrases you will use as you negotiate in business will be mainly related to the functions listed below.  Generally, you will do more relationship building at the beginning, much clarifying and summarizing throughout the talks, and more information sharing before and during problem solving.  Accepting, agreeing, proposing, and rejecting will occur in smaller bursts at various times.  Functions include: * Relationship building;* Problem solving;* Accepting, agreeing, proposing, and rejecting offers;* Summarizing and clarifying;* Breaking deadlock;* Sharing information.The first of these, Relationship building, is discussed in Chapter 2 and Problem solving is discussed in Chapter 8.  Setting the agenda, offers, summarizing, clarifying, and sharing information are discussed in this chapter.  Additionally, some practical items like setting the agenda, sharing information, handling threats, and rude language are discussed in the section Practical verbal signals.   Designing Offers and Suggesting TradeoffsRegarding negotiating with Chinese people and organizations, we learn from various authorities including Irl Davis of Global One that you should …“… try to form your negotiations with the Chinese in terms of social benefits to the Chinese.” Source: http://www.globalonepro.com This idea may be generally true regarding China and Chinese people due to their feelings about the country and culture, sometimes called guanxi.  However, the idea is not important to only Chinese people.  Let’s expand it: always show how your offer is good for the other negotiators and their interests.  You do not always need to show what is good for a whole city or country, but with any counterparty, you must demonstrate that your proposal is good for the individuals, good for the organization they represent, and good for their interests.Core language of offersIf you give us ___(specific thing)___, we will consider giving you ___(not very specific thing)___.Note: This is a review of the same point of language you can find in the section on counteroffers.Write a sentence or two making offers that are a little better for you, but acceptable for the other side:1. Offer your hotel event services at a price 5% higher than normal to the conference planning committee of IBM Japan.  ___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________2. Offer a power conversion technology for 5% more than the usual price for such technology.  ___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________Offers and Counteroffers  “How about…”   “We can do it for $6,000 per month.”    “We can’t do it for less than $6,000 per month.”  “We’d like to suggest….”  “Would you be interested in….”  “We propose…”A good counteroffer includes an idea about changes or exchanges, but not a detailed exchange.  Let the details develop as you learn more about what you can give and receive.Good:If you agree to grant us exclusive rights for the United Kingdom, then we will re-think our promotional calendar for the forthcoming year.Bad:We will give your product lead feature every month in our promotional calendar for the next year if you give us exclusive rights for the United Kingdom.  Adapted from Bare Knuckles Negotiating (Hazeldine, 2006) pg 77-78In the example above, notice that the “good” version allows the offerer to give more (and receive more).  The “bad” version allows no chance for expansion because something specific is being confirmed with no future opportunity for developing or sharing or retaining that specific point.  Package and repackage your offers As you make offers, bring together parts of the whole deal in different ways.  This effort at packaging and repackaging will help you and your counterparties to find the best fitting deal.  This process is very important in complicated integrative deals.  Talking through the choices and scenarios is likely to increase trust, satisfaction, and value.  Section Summary:1.  Help the other parties understand why your proposal is good.  2.  Ask for something specific, but carefully offer something less specific, then continue negotiating.   Accepting and Rejecting OffersFirm Acceptance “Sounds good!”  “We agree.”  “That looks like a fine idea.”  “Let’s do it.”  “We have no problem with that.”   “That’s a green light.”   “That works for us.”  "I can do that."  "I’ll go for that."  "Good idea."  "I can manage that."Tentative Acceptance“That may be alright…we will have to check with headquarters.”   “That sounds like it is in the right range, but let’s talk about it more.”  “That’s a starting point…”  “We may be able to agree with …”   “Now we are in the ballpark.” [the price is close to the target]Firm RejectionWhen you hear these, you should carefully get more information but be prepared for no agreement on the issue.  Notice that some of these seem tentative but are firm.  Examples:“That’s not possible for us.”  “No way.”  “No can do.”  “That would be a deal breaker.”  “That’s a show stopper from our point of view.”  “The cost is much too high.”  "I don’t think so."  "That's not quite what I was thinking."Referring to causes outside the company usually shows that there can be no change or discussion about a topic.  Examples: “The end users have made it clear they will not buy a product this color.”“The government has recently changed the regulations and all our products will have to be 10cm wider.”  A firm rejection may show the “reserve” position of that topic.  Probe a little more to be sure.Poorly designed rejection:Notice that this following rejection is much weaker because the rules are inside the company: “…we’ve got a problem with these because our [internal] rules have changed again since…” (Vuorela, 2005).  This is a weak rejection because it is almost certainly possible to suggest that the negotiators return to their company for permission to change the situation.  They could even make a phone call right away.  If they refuse, it might be that they were faking and do not have any rules about this.  Or they might make the rejection firmer (and more clearly real).  A weak rejection might mean that they are playing for time because they need to discuss or rethink their position.  If this seems to be the case, propose taking a break.Tentative Rejection When you hear these, you should explore more ideas, get more information and hope for an agreement.  Examples:“We would like to consider about that and discuss it more at our next meeting.”  “The cost is a little higher than we were expecting…”  “We’ll have to ask headquarters about it.”   “Our budget really can’t handle that.”  “I don’t think my boss will like it.”  “We will have to look into it….”   “I think there might be room to maneuver on that…”  “I will have to check with my boss…”  "My idea is a little different"These tentative rejections usually suggest that you will be able to agree with more discussion, understanding, and maybe concessions. Summarizing and Clarifying Summarizing/Confirming In his book “Bare Knuckle Negotiating” Hazeldine (2006) says “summarize frequently” so that all parties are clear about the details and what they agree and disagree about.  Frequent summarizing helps all parties maintain a good relationship and clear ideas about the process. Here are some examples:“So that’s $32,000 for each delivery, payable one week in advance by bank transfer, right?” “If I got it right, you mean delivery on the last day of the month and payment on the first Monday of the month, right?”“To review, we are looking at a decrease of 10% over the first five months in equal steps, right?”Also,Q.  ...I gather that your position is that even if a UNE were ordered….A.  No, that’s not what I said.  I said that if….  (Pg 148 of arbitration transcript, Ohio State)Summarizing, confirming and reviewing means that a negotiation usually goes in circles and loops.  It does not usually move forward on a straight lineClarification“Do I understand that you are willing to complete the work early?”   “What do you mean?”  “Can you meet our technical standards this year or only next year?”   “Can you explain that in a little more detail?”     “I see, how would that work with the larger product?”    Q.  …being requested is technically feasible; is that correct?A.  I don’t know if I understood that correctly.Q.  Oh, okay.  All right.  Let me….[speaker rephrases the point](Pg 125 of arbitration transcript, Ohio State) Practical Verbal SignalsHow do you know if the other side is interested in knowing more or has no more interest in agreeing?  Understanding the meaning of certain words and phrases may help.  This section includes examples of words and phrases that signal feelings.Earlier in this chapter we saw how to make offers using words and phrases that are positive sounding and flexible.  In this section, we see that careful verbal signals can show that you or the other side are willing to negotiate a point.…it is important to structure your signal so that the hint of movement on your part is conditional on the other party responding positively.  … You imply a willingness to negotiate, but only if the other party reciprocates.…“Our normal price is X.” this could be a signal that although the normal price is X, under certain circumstances, the possibility of a different price exists.  (Pg 66)Bare Knuckle Negotiating (Hazeldine)“It would be incredibly difficult for us to accept an agreement of less than five years in duration.” This signals the possibility of movement.  You are indicating that there is the possibility of flexibility.  You are not saying that you will agree to an agreement of less than five years – you are signaling that you are prepared to discuss it.  The use of the word “difficult” implies that the other party will need to provide some incentive for you to make some movement.  … You are inviting the other party to move the negotiation forward.  …encourage them to expand… “Under what circumstances would you be able to alter the specification?”“How could I make it easier for you to agree to the proposed fee?”  (Pg 72) Bare Knuckle Negotiating (Hazeldine, 2006)To summarize, the best signals invite a concession from the other side before you have made a clear offer.  Playing for timeThese phrases are useful when you need a little time to think.  “I see.”  “Could you explain that to me in a little more detail?”   “Could you repeat the first part of that idea?”  “It sounds like an interesting idea, could you run through the main points for me again?”"Let’s take a break.""I'd like to sleep on that."The most useful phrase for getting time, of course, is, “We’d like to discuss that internally – how about if we take a break?”Too expensive“This is above our budget.”  “Our expectations about cost were very different.”  "We are feeling some sticker shock." Better than we expectedImmediate agreement to a price usually indicates that the other side was worried about a worse price.  “OK!”  It may be difficult to improve the price (from your point of view) after an answer like this.  We are interested in this issueEcho questions (see Chapter 2) usually indicate strong interest or a desire to learn more about that topic.  Setting the agendaNegotiators must agree about the first general topic and its subtopics when they begin to talk.  They must agree to an agenda.  This can be done face-to-face or in the days ahead by phone, email or other method.Follow the table below to see how agenda setting works after the greeting,Table 6.4 Agenda settingActionSayCommentSet the general topicI’d like to talk about _GB Joint Venture_.We think  the Joint Venture  is a good starting point to make some positive agreements, is that alright?Agree to what you will start with.  Be flexible, if they want to start with a different issue, it is OK unless the sequence is very illogical.Specify topicsIn that case, let’s discuss the ownership structure, the decision making balance, and …..  Briefly agree what you will include in this conversation (subtopics).State position(s)We think the price of _____ should be about ______ because…..(it is good for you)Also quickly start the price conversation (high side if selling, low side if buying).  Always give a reason with a price – a reason that sounds and feels good for them.Link or DelinkThat sounds good, but we would like to talk about the 3rd one, _______, later because _____.  Is that OK?If you do not want to include a particular point, suggest handling it later.Discuss positionsWe agree about ___, but we think ____.Talk openly and freely.  Listen closely to understand what they want.  Work on details.SummarizeSo if I understand right, we all think the price should be _____ and include ______, ______, and ______.Summarize frequently and finally agree.Move to next topicLet’s move on to _____________Repeat all of above
Table 6.5 Sample dialog for setting the agendaBlue: Hello – we are glad to meet again regarding our successful JV!  We have some fresh ideas about making our cooperation even better.Greeting (Blue even sets the topic here)Red: Yes, glad to see you all again.  Greeting Blue: We would like to talk first about the JV – that is a set of issues we can easily manage together.  Let’s include restructuring ownership, decision making, and expanding the JV.  Is that alright?Topic, subtopics(Blue sets the topic/agenda)Red: Yes, but what about the decision making, we don’t see how that is a question…Subtopics Blue: We will explain – it’s a small issue that fits well with everything.  First we understand that Red will benefit from a 60/40 ownership ratio.  That will save you a lot of taxes, and a little for us too.  Basically – we agree!  But because we don’t want a simple “technology transfer” operation (we want a real JV), we would like to share decision making power 50/50.Subtopics (confirmed with reason)Red: That is a little unusual.  Can you explain what you are thinking?Question for infoBlue: Sure, we…(explains)Explanation, discussion Red: I see.  We can agree to that, though it is a little difficult and will generate some legal costs so we propose $350,000.Counter offer with reasonBlue: We can agree to a reasonable discount for the trouble.  But we admit our initial price was high – for a reason.  The reason is that …..Back to high price and explanationThis conversation could go a different way…Red could push a little more and get their topics on the agenda first.  Moving to a new topic       Let’s turn to Issue 174, please.  The issue here is whether… (Pg 120 of arbitration transcript, Ohio State)       OK.  And I’m not exactly a cost expert either, so we’ll move on.  (Pg 144 of arbitration transcript, Ohio State)Responding to threatsIn a negotiation you may hear a range of threats to your position.  Some are acceptable and some are unacceptable.  Table 6.6 Acceptable and unacceptable threatsAcceptableUnacceptable“We will have to compare your offer to your competitors.”“Your timing does not suit us.  We might give that part of the contract to XY Corp.”“If you don’t agree to this, we will go directly to your competitor and you will never survive in this business.”“We’ll damage your relationship with your main customer, if you don’t agree to this.”CommentAcceptable threats do not suggest any significant danger to the business or personal trouble to the other party.  These are acceptable and within the range of normal business.Unacceptable threats reach beyond the immediate business talks and suggest serious damage, even personal damage, to the other party.  Note: the best way to react to a threat is to respond directly with facts.  A direct response will show clearly that you can react and continue the conversation instead of giving in to the demand.  Alternatively, you can respond with silence while waiting for the threat making side to make the next move.  When you respond with silence, your silence is a signal that you are not satisfied with the offer or threat.  Your counterparts probably do not really want to end the negotiation, so you do not have to give in to threats in order to save the deal.  If the other side really wants to end the negotiation, let them end it; remember, their BATNA must be good enough that they can walk away.  If your BATNA is strong enough, you can walk away and find a new negotiation partner that does not make threats.For more on tactics and responding to negative tactics, see Chapter 7.  Making threatsDon’t make “unacceptable” threats at all.  Even “acceptable threats” should be kept to a minimum by companies engaged in productive talks that will lead to greater future cooperation.  “Acceptable threats” are not good tools for building relationships.Rude, Vulgar, Taboo These words may be used casually and can even help to relax a formal or tense atmosphere.  However, generally you should avoid words that are considered rude, vulgar, and taboo.  This is especially good advice for non-native speakers of English who may not be able to use the words correctly.  If your counterparties use these words, try to determine if they are intentionally being casual, or if they are genuinely upset.  If they are truly upset, look for ways to decrease the tension.   Deadlock and Breaking DeadlockSometimes parties in a negotiation cannot agree.  This situation is called deadlock.  If deadlock happens to you, you have a few possible actions:1) Leave the topic temporarily and come back to it later;2) Take a break to rethink, relax, and reset. This can include socializing with the other parties; 3) Cut the issue out of the negotiation permanently;4) Link the topic creatively to another topic, action, or concession;5) Make a new try with other contacts (different people at the counterparty’s organization, different staff on the negotiation teams, removing yourself from the team, etc.) while considering personality, and emotional style of participants (Thompson, 2012);  6) Develop a backchannel contact – a person in the organization who is not directly related to the topic matter (warning, this may be seen as underhanded or tricky, especially in business);7) Agree to an independent fact finder who can decide on a specific problem such as a price evaluation;8) Review the deep interests of the parties; 9) Joint creative or problem solving work to refresh the relationship; 10) Agree to a set of rules that can be used impartially by all sides;11) Consider alternative dispute resolution (ADR) methods such as mediation or arbitration.  See Chapter 10 for more on the subject of ADR;12) Review the interests of the other side to find a motivation you can strengthen to restart; for example, playing on an interest to avoid court battles by using an ultimatum or mild threat such as, “We could go to court…”;13) Review the BATNA of the other sides for weak points to attract them back to talking;14) Suggest that each party submit a “final best offer” to be evaluated by an independent party.  Final Offer Arbitration, for example, requires a judge to pick the most reasonable offer without blending or compromising.  In this system, unreasonable offers will lose in favor of more reasonable ones.  This approach means that the parties will submit reasonable offers in order to not block themselves from winning (Bazerman & Kahneman, 2016).	Of course, if the deadlock cannot be broken and the issue cannot be abandoned, you or the other side may have to use your BATNA.  Wade (2006) gives a slightly different view of the above options in the context of family disputes.  What to say when deadlock occurs* I think we are becoming stuck on this topic, let’s move on to ….* Seems like we are stuck, how about a break before we continue with another issue?* It seems like we can’t agree about this, so let’s talk about another topic and come back to this later.  Is that OK?* After 2 hours we still disagree, how about removing this from the negotiations and asking an independent party to decide?* We clearly disagree about who made the mistake, let’s find a judge who can decide clearly about it.  In the meantime, let’s continue talking about…* We frankly cannot pay more than $12,500 for the equipment.  However, we could pay a little more for the installation if you allow us to select the work team…what do you think?* Is it possible to do that work under some limited or special conditions?Another approach – Consider the points in the problem issue that you can understandFisher and Shapiro (2005) suggest that a negotiator take a neutral position temporarily while communicating with the other parties about a troublesome issue.  If there are points in the issue that you can understand, it may help the other side to appreciate your points after you have demonstrated that you understand their points.  Section Summary:Creative ideas and links to other issues are best for breaking deadlocks, but it is not always possible.  Identifying unresolvable deal breaking deadlock issues in advance will save time and cost. Shutdown MovesHow can you bring a negotiation to an end at the right time? In his 2010 book Negotiauctions, G. Subramanian of Harvard Business School describes shutdown moves as a way to prevent the other side(s) from finding better deals with competitors.  Subramanian also points out that timing is important – shutdown moves must appear when the other side is close to accepting and delay would result in their reconsideration of alternatives.  Wade (2006) provides a list that includes deadlock breaking moves as well those designed to finish a negotiation.  Selected shutdown moves from Subramanian and Wade are in the table below.  Table 6.7 Shutdown movesMoveLanguage exampleCommentA spoonful of sugar If we sign off now, I will make sure that your logo is at the entrance all week – free.These shutdown moves can create value and convenience for all parties.  It is possible to make these too restrictive or even negative (spoonful of vinegar).  Design these moves carefully.Appealing release termsIf we agree now, we will release you from the agreement if oil prices rise 5% more than expected this year.Acceptable penalty clausesYou can break the agreement by paying a 5% fee any time in the first 4 weeks.A spoonful of vinegarIf we don’t agree today, the prices will go up by 10%.Direct appealIt looks like we have covered all the issues well, can you agree with the deal as it is?If the parties are basically satisfied, this move can bring a close to the deal with no more time lost.  Compare benefitsLet’s review the proposal in detail.  (List the benefits to all parties in detail, possibly in spreadsheet format.) This move appeals to negotiators who appreciate rights and fairness.  If a party has a win-lose mindset, emphasize the “better” value they are getting.Extra strong moral positionIf you agree now, we can deliver these medicines immediately, and help those people!This kind of shutdown move is unreasonable.  Do not rush into an agreement.  Avoid using this kind of shutdown move.Split the differenceWe have come so far, how about we meet in the middle?This move catches tired negotiators who may have lost track of where the “middle” really is.  Instead, share resources or repackage until both sides have satisfying benefits.Defer an issueLooks like we agree about everything else, so let’s cut out the problem issue and worry about it next year.If the agreement is workable without that problem issue, this may be useful for the parties.Time restrictionsOur offer is only open until the stock market starts on Monday morning – we must have an agreement by then.These are ultimatums. Do not accept, just coolly reevaluate.  See the section on tactics.  Avoid using these because of the risk that the other party will walk away agreeing that progress is impossible.Ultimatum Agree now or we will withdraw the offer!You may have to attempt these moves more than once – Subramanian (2010) tells us that only 20% attempts are immediately successful.  Section Summary:Time your shutdown moves carefully to complete phases of a negotiation or the whole thing.  Polite persistence may be necessary.   Visual CommunicationIt is not necessary to communicate by speaking and writing only.  A business negotiation can be an opportunity for very broad communication, especially during problem solving discussions.  Using visual communication can support the ability of the parties to communicate and create solutions.  Q.  What is visual communication?A.  Using pictures, diagrams, sketches, models, skits, charts, etc., to share ideas and solve problems. These things can be casual or professional, prepared in advance, or created on the spot.  They can be made by one person, or all parties.  Innovations in information communication technology, such as cloud IT, can offer improved information exchange and storage.  The sharing of materials this way is a gesture that may start a trusting interaction process in addition to allowing collaboration which in turn can lead to more trust.   Q.  Why should we bother with visual communication?  After all, speaking works well and drawing bad pictures does not seem very professional.A.  Visual communication improves on spoken communication in three aspects of negotiation according to Swaab et al. (2002):- Understanding;- Relationship;- Satisfaction.  Further, joint creation of images can lead to joint problem solving which also supports understanding, relationship and satisfaction.  Presentations: Presentations and slide decks are for delivering information in one direction.  Negotiations however combine input from all parties.  Therefore, a presentation is usually not appropriate for a negotiation.  If you feel an introductory presentation is useful, keep it short and simple.  The slides should be uncluttered, but not black and white.  Use animations, images, diagrams, maps, video, graphs, and tables more than words.  Warning: animations must be simple, not complicated, not distracting and not overly cute.  In any case, bring the presentation on paper in case of technical problems. Handouts: Handouts are much more suitable for a business negotiation than presentations.  Handouts can be reviewed in any order at any time by all parties.  All parties can contribute their ideas to the handout simply by writing on it.  Each handout can focus on a single point.  More information can be delivered and developed by use of handouts than through presentations.How to make useful drawings and diagrams on paper or whiteboardDan Roam in his book The Back of the Napkin suggests that you consider five dimensions when you want to visually communicate.  These dimensions are:* Simple vs Elaborate* Quality vs Quantity* Vision vs Execution* Individual vs Compare* Change vs As-isRoam, D.  (2010)Understanding these five issues will help you quickly decide what kind of image to draw and what the focus of your communication should be and how to draw it.  Use a Simple picture to communicate only about that object, but draw an Elaborate picture to show the object in its context (use, origin, users, transportation, etc.).  Draw a Quality picture to discuss a detailed characteristic of an object.  Quantity pictures include graphs, charts, and numbers.  If your idea is about how the final of a new business activity, draw a Vision picture that show things as they will be.  A Vision picture might show the customers using the product that solves their problems. If your idea is about the processes necessary to create a new business activity, draw an Execution picture showing the steps.  An Execution picture might be a process diagram or flow chart with lines and arrows.Individual pictures show one object, but in order to compare you should draw more than of that object.  With several drawings, you can point out individual differences, for example the meaning of quality in apples (size, shape, bites, bruises etc.)Your drawing might show Change or the As-is situation.  As-is pictures show the object or idea as it works (or does not work) now.  The Change picture shows how the system would be in the future.  Summary: choose the picture or short series of pictures that will be most useful for you.  Make simple drawings because they are quick and effective.  You will improve your communication ability with practice, but the goal is not to draw nice pictures, just to communicate!As an answer to the earlier question whether a whiteboard or computer is better suited for a situation, consider the table below.  Table 6.9 Comparing visual mediaWhiteboard Computer, tablet, etc.Many can access it simultaneously Only one person at the timeEasily used and modifiedMay not be easy to draw complex ideasSkills widely availableSlow typing or weak graphics skills will harm the processPromotes co-creationBlocks joint useBuilds relationshipTends toward struggles for control of machineNot hard to save (photograph and process later)Easy to save and distributeWith only one plus point on the computer side, the advantages are heavily in favor of doing the work by hand.  Cloud-sharing and collaborative technologies however could make computers and related equipment more accessible to all participants in the negotiation.	Advice to co-create with counterparties: Share the paper and pens;Use a whiteboard;Stick figures and non-beautiful drawings are OK;Bring a few color pencils/markers (too many colors will lead to confusion);Keep it Simple Short (KISS); Practice a little to improve your skills, but don’t worry too much!ConclusionUse whiteboards, prepared graphics and diagrams, photos, video, animations, sticky notes, notepaper, even paper napkins, or collaborative electronic tools.  Visual communication supports problem solving, idea sharing, and relationship building.	Remote and electronic negotiationsBut not all negotiations are face to face.  Email and teleconferencing may make it impossible to share the use of a whiteboard or paper.  In that case, it is possible to encourage joint problem solving by sharing documents through collaboration software.  See below in this chapter for more information on remote negotiations.  Section Summary:Use visualizations of all sorts to facilitate communication of ideas in negotiation – these support the verbal negotiation and are generally accepted as serious. Remote Electronic Negotiations Increasingly the business world negotiates partly or entirely by remote media: video, phone, email.  These tools are convenient and accessible – a smart phone might be enough for all of these.  The advantages of remote electronic talks include convenience and speed.  The disadvantages include having less context around the talk: facial expressions, voice tone, gestures, and so on.  These clues are minimized or cut out completely in remote negotiations, and it becomes easier to miscommunicate.  Lean media is helpful to build information certainty and avoid vagueness – use lean media for simple messages and content.  Using email features wisely can be efficient, by attaching self-explanatory files such as figures, images and illustration.  Use poor media more with established relationships where meanings and intent are already established and clear.Use rich media for complex discussions, emotional content, and new relationships.  The figure below suggests which form of communication to choose depending on the relationship and the complexity of the issues.When we negotiate, we often use multiple communication channels to exchange information, such as phone, email, face to face, video and so on.  How can we pick the best channel for a specific moment?  Understanding types of information helps negotiators select the most appropriate communication channel.  There are two information processes to consider: information conveyance and information convergence (Dennis & Valacich, 1999; Dennis et al., 2008).  Information conveyance processInformation conveyance focuses on distributing divergent and uncertain information including objective data and analytical information.  The data and information help develop new, diverse and concrete ideas jointly.  Information conveyance occurs to clarify general routines and standard circumstances and gain common broad understandings.  Information convergence processInformation convergence focuses on gaining common results such as defining problems and resolving understanding.  The convergence process involves subjective ideas and individual thoughts to provide familiar, distilled and deep thoughts in order to comprehend unique situations and help the group react to unexpected situations.In addition, communication channels include various capabilities for information conveyance and information convergence.  Channel capabilities include features such as:- Transmission clarity which enhances the clues for immediate comprehension.  E.g., physical presence, visual enhancement, verbal delivery, written approaches, graphical support, dialectical interaction and analytical tools.- Reusability which allows users to re-process and repeat the information.- Procedure rehearsability which makes it possible to store information and resume the information development before the actual delivery.- Symbol variety which lets users offer various types of verbal, non-verbal and para-verbal communication.- Multi-tasking which allows users to simultaneously communicate and evaluate.  - Access control which allows enabling and disabling private and public access.  - Relational quality which develops relational connections and nurtures the depth of relationships.  Email advantagesAccording to the graphics above, email and text messaging are the media that carry the least context information.  Email, unlike text messaging, does not even tell the users if a person is available or not.  With so little context, there are some advantages to be exploited:* No instant response needed (asynchronous)Email does not require an immediate response, it can wait for minutes or days at your convenience.  After opening an email, you can take time to gather information and consider alternatives before answering.  * Language skillsIf the negotiating parties do not share the same native language, email allows for slow responses with time to create and revise in the foreign language.  This slow process is much more comfortable (and more grammatically accurate) than the immediate give and take of live communication.  Language learners benefit from email’s low-pressure format.* Low barrier Some people feel more comfortable proposing an idea when it is not face to face or not using live media.  Email provides the feeling of insulation from a poorly promoted proposal (author research, Chen).Additionally, low power individuals may communicate more and more successfully using email or messaging (Thompson, 2012).* Manage emotions Email does not necessarily show emotions, especially if you take time creating and revising it.  You can manage your display of emotions to make the recipient think you are happy, angry, satisfied, etc.  On the other hand, it is easy for recipients to misread email because they project their own emotions or worries onto the email.  Therefore, extra care in writing, careful use of emoticons, follow up calls, and visits is wise.Define a clear purpose for your emailIf your email’s purpose remains uncertain, the message may be misunderstood or even remain unread.  Therefore, the person responsible for writing the email needs to explicitly and clearly address the key points during the introduction to motivate the recipient(s) to carry on reading and get the point.  However, if the introduction is overly long or unclear, the reader may lose focus or skip passages of text and miss or overlook one or more key points.  Therefore an informative subject line and brief introduction are the best combination.  Don’t waste your time writing something that people won’t read.  Make it easy for your recipient(s) to know what you require and expect from them.  A clear and concise indication respectfully phrased can help an email recipient understand the key points.Types of emailFive kinds of email can be generalized.  You should clarify the type as early in the email as possible to help the reader(s) quickly identify the nature of the text and whether it is of interest.  The five types of email are:- Information sharing: conveying information without the need for a response.  Such as, sales advertisement, reminders; etc., but avoid lengthy, excessive texts.  Be explicit – help the reader understand who; what; where; when etc.  Identify the topic clearly and share the information concisely.  - Inquiries: requesting advice or providing answers to questions.  Responding to inquiries helps the sender gather information which may be advantageous to all parties.  Number the questions in encourage a thorough response.  Do not ask many questions in one email.  Limit or avoid open ended and vague questions.  - Required actions: Taking an action towards an issue is required to move an agenda forward.  Such as: forwarding an email, linking to a webpage, receiving/checking attached files; etc.- Open-ended discussion: Having a dialogue to keep the communication active, for the purpose of a mutual benefit or a future interaction.  Such as: brainstorming, project development; etc.- Advice: If a sender requests advice on a problem, replying with a vague or an irrelevant comment (e.g. complaints) is likely to delay matters.  It is important to offer concise suggestions.  Generally, it is a good practice to include links to supporting sources.  Because advising and problem solving is a complex process, it is good to propose a phone call or face to face conversation.  Structure of successful email  Subject line – never send an email without an informative subject line.  Six or fewer words is best.  The topic and your general feeling or opinion should be clear.Greeting – always start with the name(s) of the intended recipient(s).  For example: “Dear Bob,” or “Bob,” or for a group, “Bob, Tom, and Susan,” You can also start “Dear Team,” “Dear All,” etc.  Lead to the next communication – In successful business, one activity leads to another.  Finish up with phrases like “…please send me your response…”  “…let me know your opinion about…” “…I will call tomorrow to talk about the details…” “…please review the attached document and send it…” “…I’ll be in your district on Thursday, let’s discuss this further over a coffee…”  Assertively and politely stating the date and/or time when a response needed is most likely to result in a timely reply.  Closing – close with a polite ending “Best regards, Tom” is a good for general purpose ending, or “Thank you, Tom”.  Avoid “Sincerely, Tom” or overly warm closings.  “Thanks” is acceptable for an internal email in an established business relationship.  After your name, a business email should include a few lines (about four) with your organization and contact information.  Completeness – help the reader understand who; what; where; when etc.  In face to face communication or in other situations, it is easy to gather related information to the core message.  However email lacks this additional context, and may be read much later when the surrounding details are no longer fresh.  Therefore, identify yourself and the topic clearly.  When responding to an email, keep any previous email(s) in your response.  Clarity – avoid complicated grammar.  Keep it simple.Simplicity – Avoid complicated and delicately nuanced ideas.  Keep it simple.  If you have much to communicate, do it face to face, by phone, or in a longer attached document with supporting info.Only one main subject – discuss only one main topic in one email.  Send a new email for any new topic.Try to include only two or three support points, if possible.  Why?  The reader may not have time or focus to manage more.  The authors’ experience is that “one point gets through, two might get through, more rarely get through.” This is especially true for high level managers who often simply do not have time for more than minimal and clear communications.  Length – keep it short.  Casual AbbreviationsAs a rule, do not use casual abbreviations even in casual email.  These change frequently and therefore may easily be misunderstood.  Some are funny…but some are quite rude!  Never use a rude one in your emails or other writing.  From the list below, ASAP, COB, and FYI are widely used in business.  You must recognize some of these but avoid them in general.  ASAP – as soon as possible COB – close of business (usually means 5 pm)FYI – for your informationLOL – laugh out loudOMG – oh my godROFL – roll on floor laughingW84it – wait for it IMHO – in my honest opinion IIRC – if I recall correctlyFUBAR – damaged beyond all repairSome last points of email etiquette* Use common business acronyms and jargon with other professionals who know them – it will show that you are also professional.   * Do not use slang and local abbreviations in business email at all.* If you are forwarding or re-posting a message you've received, do not change the wording.  You may shorten the message and quote only relevant parts, but be sure to properly identify the source.  * In order to ensure that people know who you are, be sure to include a line or two at the end of your message with contact information… keep it short, no more than 4 lines.  * A single address may go to a group even though the address looks like it is just one person.  Know to whom you are sending!  * Be careful about cc's when replying.  Do not accidentally exclude people.  Also, do not continue to include extra people if the messages have become a 2-way conversation.  * Do not write with all capital letters.  IT LOOKS AS IF YOU'RE SHOUTING ANGRILY.  This is true for email and all writing.  Do not use all capitals for brand names like TOYOTA.  * Never write anything in an email that you would not write in a letter or memo…foolish words may return to you!Adapted from: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1855.txtSection Summary:Select the means of communication based on the contents; choose the best method for the level of expression and complexity.  Carefully design your email from the subject line to the closing to get the right content to your audience in the right way.  
Chapter 7 – Negotiation Tactics  Tactics at the TableThis chapter contains a few points about tactics used at the negotiating table.  Tactics means actions you take during negotiation.  First, we will consider distributive tactics.  These have the purpose of improving your outcome regarding resources you need to get.  Distributive tactics are tactics that match well with a competitive strategy and will not help to build good relationships.  In fact, the opposite is usually true – these tactics damage relationships.Distributive tacticsFlinch To flinch means to draw back in pain or surprise.  In a negotiation, a person might flinch in reaction to a demand or proposal that seems extreme.  A very strong flinch might include showing anger.  A flinch can cause the other party to give a concession, but also that it may damage the relationship as shown by Fassina & Whyte (2013).  Their research also explained that a flinch may be natural or fake.Higher authority Sometimes a negotiator will refuse to agree to a proposal that is entirely possible.  In order to get more concessions, the negotiator might insist on getting approval from the boss.  This negotiator may go out of the room and pretend to call the boss, hoping it will seem like it is not possible to give a small concession.  Silence With some individuals, and even some cultures, silence feels uncomfortable at the negotiating table.  If one side feels uncomfortable with silence, it may be possible to get a concession simply by looking thoughtful.  Example: “How about $10,000?” (no answer) “Well, then $9,000?”  In this example the silent party does not need to give a concession in order to get a concession.  While it may be effective, it is not a helpful tactic for building relationships and trust.Experienced negotiators will not drop their price, instead they will wait or ask questions in order to understand what the silent party can agree to.  This kind of silence is a distributive tactic – using it sends a signal that you are dissatisfied with the offer.  It is also possible to use silence constructively; for more about that, see the comments on silence in the section on integrative tactics.Information overload This tactic involves providing large amounts of detailed information, spreadsheets, analyses, numbers, statistics and so on.  The intent is to confuse the other party so that they will make a mistake or simply become lost in the information.  Decoy/red herring/misdirection In this tactic, one party does not reveal the true priority of their most important issue.  For example, they may want a red car but only ask about green cars.  When no green car is available, they unhappily (it seems) accept the red car if it is discounted.  The people who use this tactic most successfully are able to gently introduce a bias in the counterparty toward the thing that they don’t want.Stalling It is quite common to create a little extra time for your own thinking during a negotiation by asking for details or explanations that might not be really necessary.  This kind of delay is called stalling.  Generally, negotiators understand and are comfortable with a little bit of stalling as one party or another thinks and plans.  However, it is not considered acceptable to intentionally expend large amounts of time hoping to pressure another party into acting unwisely at the last moment.  If the counterparty stalls a lot, you should be prepared for them to give you sudden, complex offers shortly before the deadline for finishing the negotiation.  You should be prepared to say no, to extend your negotiating time, and to use your BATNA.  You can use the time in which the other side is stalling to learn about them through questioning and other research methods.  As time runs out you should resist the pressure to agree.  Instead, it may be possible to ask to work with another negotiator, possibly even moving up the hierarchy to work with the boss of the negotiator!  Another response is to move your schedule forward, inform the other team that you have very little time remaining thus putting the same pressure on them.  This is an aggressive approach, and not advisable, just as extreme stalling is not advisable.  Last minute decisions and agreements may contain significant errors and result in agreements that are poor for one or all parties, or which lead to expensive renegotiation or collapse.  In the past, US businesses, seeking to quickly close a deal, have been easy victims of stalling and have agreed to unfavorable terms shortly before leaving to the airport.  However, smart US businesses are ready to quickly change partners or to allow much extra time for concluding negotiations.  If you choose to stall, you should be aware that the other side may use its BATNA and break off negotiations.  Last minute demands Some negotiators will make a request for a concession very late in the process, even as documents are prepared for signing.  This tactic intends to catch the other side off guard or off balance, with the hope of getting an easy concession.  Best reaction: Don’t agree immediately, but make it clear that you have the time and willingness to renegotiate the entire package and all the related linked issues.    Some negotiators will ask for a concession even after signing.  Best reaction: Don’t agree immediately, but make it clear that you have the time and willingness to renegotiate the entire package and all the related linked issues.  You may however grant the extra concession…why?  Because it could help to build a relationship.  In some regions, including much of east Asia, a negotiation party may expect to give or expect to request "a little" in the comfortable belief that business partners can do "a little" extra if they are serious about the relationship.  If this expectation is accepted and known by all parties, the relationship may improve.  However if one of the parties comes from a different cultural background, the request may be damaging to the relationship.  In conclusion, negotiators who are comfortable with making demands after signing should first consider whether the other parties are comfortable with accommodating those demands and not make the demand if the other side is unlikely to appreciate it.Retracting an offerMany people consider it unreasonable or even unethical to retract an offer after making it.  But is it so bad?  An offer is not an agreement.  And a whole agreement is not finished until all the parts have been completed and formalized.  On the other hand, if people generally do not expect offers to be retracted, someone who does it regularly may be socially ill – pathological.  However, behaviors that seem very wrong among one group of people may seem quite acceptable in another group.  One person famous for retracting offers and other aggressive negotiation tactics was Steve Jobs, founder and sometime CEO of Apple.  A Sony executive commenting in W.  Isaacson's 2011 biography of Steve Jobs had this to say about Jobs.   '"In classic Steve fashion, he would agree to something, but it would never happen," said Lack.  "He would set you up and then pull it off the table.  He's pathological, which can be useful in negotiations."' Isaacson, 2011, pg 401False concessions/bogey It is not uncommon to offer a false concession, allowing the other party to struggle to get something that you would give them anyway.  Your HIT list, discussed above, include things you Have to Get.  It might also include things you Have to Get Rid Of.  If your Have-to-Get list includes something you must get rid of, it might be possible to trade it for a concession, as if you wanted to keep it.  See the example of a false concession below (sometimes these are called “padded concessions”).False concessions are not uncommon, so you should be aware of them.  Avoid giving something for a false concession.  Make false concessions carefully.  If you offer a false concession, you must never reveal that you were planning to give it anyway!Disinformation stratagemThe quote below is from Howard Raiffa's (2002) book on negotiation.  He describes a disinformation tactic that he punished, but which of course is used in the real world.“One student, let me call him X, playing against Y, excused himself to go to the bathroom and left behind his written confidential instructions.  Y couldn’t resist noticing X’s confidential RV and took advantage of X.  Or so Y thought.  Y did not know that X…put in a false number.  Y lost mightily and X was triumphant.  Y complained to the instructor of the unfair practices of X.  The instructor docked points from both.”  Raiffa, 2002, p 271 Of course, in a real-world negotiation, there is no professor to enforce fairness or ethical behavior.  Clearly, it is ethically unacceptable to trick a business negotiation partner.  In fact, if the result is very bad for one side, they may be able in some legal systems to annul the resulting contract legally, if the trick is discovered.  Even if there is no court proceeding, discovery of the tactic will probably damage the reputation of the party that managed the trickery.  In addition, there may be the cost of lost time and money as a contract broken or terminated must be replaced using other partners.  UltimatumsAn ultimatum is an aggressive offer usually like this one: “Accept the offer by 1 PM or we are finished.” An ultimatum usually damages the relationship and the negotiations in general.  Therefore, you should avoid making ultimatums. How to manage an ultimatum If another party gives you an ultimatum, you can follow these guidelines:- Do not react quickly, even though there is pressure to react quickly.- Play for a little time, see Chapter 6 for useful phrases.- Coolly compare the ultimatum to your BATNA, o …walk away from the negotiation if necessary.- Play for longer time:  o Propose value creating ideas;o Make counteroffers;o Link existing ideas and goals to the ultimatum.Trashing the product (buyer tactic)Sometimes a buyer will attack the product that is at the heart of a sale.  The purpose is to show that the buyer is only barely willing to accept the product and therefore the price must come down to their estimation.  The process of “trashing the product” can be quite long and thorough, particularly in negotiations with Chinese teams. An individual famous for starting negotiations with extensive trashing of the other parties’ products was Steve Jobs, the founder and CEO of Apple.  Less experienced teams, especially from Western cultures, have found themselves shocked, upset, bored and irritated after listening to this process for hours or days.  However, the best response to this process is to quietly listen, learn if possible how to better satisfy the customer, and not give more than a symbolic concession.  Therefore, you should have some symbolic concession prepared in advance!The worst way to react is to get upset or lower the price significantly.  Lies and detecting lies and reacting to lies ***It is generally wise to check for lies and deception, though without showing mistrust for the other parties.  Cellich and Jain (2004) suggest following these three strategies to catch a lie.  	1) Test the consistency of the other party’s statements by comparing statements and by asking questions to confirm accurate information.  This process is also called the "inconsistency trap".  However, an inconsistent negotiator may not be trying to deceive.  The negotiator may not be aware of the inconsistency, in such cases the "inconsistency trap" can help to clarify logical errors to the benefit of all parties.  2) Communicate in several ways (speaking, writing, email, fax, etc.) because it is harder to lie consistently in numerous formats.  When speaking face to face, look for non-verbal cues such as gestures, eye and facial movements that reveal nervousness and possible deception.3) Ask for tangible proof of issues that are in question (regulations, legal agreements, previous contracts).If you think the other party is lying, you can follow one of these strategies.- React with silence until the other side clarifies the issues (not helpful if the other party does not understand why you are silent).- Express concern politely about the possible lie and wait for the other party to clarify it suitably.- Review your BATNA and decide if you should end the negotiation because it is unwise to work with a party that might lie.  - Increase your efforts to learn about the other party and their interests.  Why you should not lie:You should not lie because:- If discovered, the relationship will be badly damaged.- A contract made based on a lie (or other fraud) can be voided in many legal systems including UNIDROIT, an international contract law accepted and enforced in many countries.  After voiding the contract due to a mistake based on a lie, the liar may have to pay damages according to UNIDROIT (Art.  3.2(2) UNIDROIT Principles, 2010).- Your reputation among other businesses may decline.What to do if the other party……wants a price too high or low for you: ask questions about the specific points they expect.  Break down the costs item by item.  See if you can add or remove expensive or unnecessary items. …delivers a final demand or request (an ultimatum) that you dislike such as “$x is my last offer.”  Don’t accept or reject it immediately.  Gain time and information by asking more detailed questions about the offer.  If this is a fixed BATNA position, you may have to choose to agree or to leave the negotiation.  If it is not a fixed point, the other side will eventually allow some concessions or cooperation.  …offers a great price at the beginning.  Do not immediately accept it, even if it is good.  Learn more about it so that you can either improve the price or develop a more complex and valuable business relationship with the other party.…uses a "sad song" to play on emotions.  This tactic makes a heartfelt request for significant concessions.  In North America or Europe, a “sad song” might come at the beginning or middle of negotiations; pay no attention to it.  In some parts of the world, the sad song may require some sympathetic reaction including perhaps minor concessions.  However, do not give large concessions for it.  In Japan this tactic (called naniwabushi) is sometimes used successfully against non-Japanese companies that do not expect or understand it, though research done for this textbook suggests it is less common than in the past.  Ignoring the sad song and giving nothing may damage the relationship – it may be part of cementing the relationship for some organizations in some cultures.  Discuss with your partners: which of the above tactics are too aggressive?  Which are acceptable?  Do you think people from different cultures might have different answers?Avoiding unethical negotiation tacticsPlease visit this useful article by Roger Dawson on identifying and avoiding unethical tactics.http://reiclub.com/articles/real%20estate%20negotiating Additional reading: “B2B negotiation tactics in creative sectors” by Sigurdardattir et al. (2018), identifies categories of tactics and discusses how they are used in arts, entertainment, and other creative businesses.Playing the hard card first Some negotiators like to start with an aggressive stance even though they plan to be flexible and even soft during the negotiations.  This is sometimes called playing the hard card.  This tactic is a kind of impression management, see that discussion in Chapter 2.Defense against tactics: Calm and ExperienceWith time you will learn to quickly identify aggressive tactics as they happen.  Simply, you will become more sensitive to tactics.  When you identify the tactic, you will know how best to react.  Generally, the best reactions combine further communication and managing the relationship.  But do not change your position because of the tactic – only change your position based on negotiated concessions and joint problem solving.  In many cases your most powerful defense against aggressive negotiation tactics will be time.  The more time you have, the more flexibly, carefully and constructively you can react during the negotiation.  Time allows you to react calmly and reject pressure tactics in general.  Make it clear to all parties (your boss, the other negotiation parties, your co-workers, and other important stakeholders) that you need and will use as much time as necessary to get a result that maximizes gains for all sides.  Section Summary:Use distributive tactics carefully – these are essentially NOT frank negotiation approaches.  Avoid aggressive negotiation tactics and the people who use them.  A broadly successful defense against all negative tactics is to keep a cool head and work patiently forward based on the mutual interests of the parties.  Integrative tacticsTrading information The other side information about your business activities and plans while asking about theirs.  Allow the counterparties to lead the conversation if they want to.  When asked, you should provide information as long as it is not sensitive or secret.  The ideas about trading info are included in more detail in the section on Reciprocity.  Which information is too sensitive to share?  That depends on your opinion.  You may decide that it is OK to reveal all details (FOTE or Full Open and Truthful Exchange) or that some details should be kept secret such as your reserve price, (POTE or Partial Open and Truthful Exchange).  Asking questions to develop understanding This integrative approach shows positive interest and helps both sides to declare, explain and discover their interests.  See the section in Chapter 2 called Gaining and Giving Information for more about these questions.Trading concessions (logrolling) This approach can help to end a deadlock or disagreement.  When trading, try to give up issues that are low priority for you and gain issues that are low priority for the other side (but high priority for you).  While trading and compromising can never be completely satisfying, it is sometimes the only way to resolve disagreements.  If the parties can agree on trading, they may improve their relationship enough to manage value creating ideas and problem solving.Silence In the section on distributive tactics we saw how silence can be distributive (by showing you are dissatisfied and putting pressure on the other side to make a better offer). But silence can also be used in a constructive way. When you are collaborating, silence shows that you are thinking.  Silence in this kind of situation also means that the other sides can continue to think and speak freely. Section Summary: Use integrative tactics to build up relationships and to improve outcomes.  Avoid integrative tactics when the issue or the whole negotiation is clearly distributive and there is no relationship to maintain or improve.   Persuasion ApproachesNegotiators can use several approaches to influence the thinking of the other sides.  Li and Sadler (2011) summarize nine varieties of influence strategies, several of which we will discuss here.  LegitimatingThis approach may be effective with parties that place high importance on relative rank and prestige of individuals and organizations.  The legitimating approach links proposals to respected people and institutions to increase the respect for the proposal.  For example, the proposing side may point out that it is similar to the work of a famous person familiar to the other parties.  Suggesting that your proposal has been accepted in the past by a famous person like Bill Gates or Jack Ma might influence the other side to accept it.  To be effective, the choice of legitimating person or organization must match well to the knowledge and thinking of the other parties.  Rational persuasionThis approach relies on thinking that seems logical and sensible to the other parties.  Presenting data about industry standards or the expectations of people in a certain region may help a party to agree to a proposal that is in line with that data.  For example, offering salaries that are 5% better than the local standard instead of paying each individual according to their specific merits.  This approach may be most effective with negotiators who are rational in style as described in Chapter 9.  Inspirational appealsThis approach relies on transmitting emotional involvement and commitment to the other parties.  Showing how a proposal would benefit a large number of people or a specific group might make the proposal more appealing.  For example, a member of an ethnic minority may be swayed by a proposal that benefits other members of that community.  This approach may be effective with parties that have a strong sense of community and collective action, see the comment on guanxi in Chapter 6.  IngratiationThis approach is a way to build relationships, however it is insincere.  Flattery may be effective in the short term, however long term relationships are best when built on mutual success and satisfaction.  Ingratiation is a process to urge the other sides into positive thinking before asking for high demands that they might not otherwise accept.Strategic exchangeThis approach calls on previous interactions where one side has made concessions and would now like the other parties to make concessions.  This integrative tactic can only work where there is a strong relationship that has survived several transactions and will probably continue to survive for many more.  If the party receiving the strategic exchange proposal does not foresee a long term positive relationship, it will have no motivation to agree.  Other approaches described by Li and Sadler include coercive threats, discussed in Chapter 6 of this textbook as well as jointly consulting to solve problems, a topic which is discussed in several places in this textbook.Section Summary:Use various persuasion approaches depending on the nature of the situation and what you know about the counterparty. Humor in the NegotiationAppropriate humor has at least three useful functions in a negotiation:- to decrease tension;- to build rapport; and- to devalue a proposal.In a negotiation you can use humor carefully to relax the groups.  At the same time, humor builds rapport and positive feeling among the negotiating parties and can be used systematically to manage the relationship (Vuorela, 2005).  Humor therefore has a similar positive effect and value as small talk.  Humor requires the participation of all parties to be successful, so it is fundamentally cooperative (Vuorela, 2005).  Any jokes should be easy to understand, simple and only gently distracting.  Jokes that distract too much from the atmosphere and the topic will seem unprofessional and will not build rapport.  Devaluing a proposalUsed this way, humor is a tactic that can make a proposal you want to reject seem bad to all parties.  Careful and gentle use of humor like this can make a proposal seem weak without damaging the relationship.  Slightly stronger use of such humor may seem mocking and will probably damage the relationship.Inappropriate humor will damage the relationship and the joke making side can lose status and seem foolish.  Inappropriate humor includes complicated jokes (including satiric and ironic content), jokes on taboo or sensitive subjects, and anything that could seem insulting.  Of course, please do not tell jokes as if a comedian had joined the negotiating team! Revealing issues through humorIn her work on humor in negotiation, Joan Emmerson (1969) found that a joking reference to a difficult or even taboo problem could help identify and address an issue to other parties.  Because an issue might be unacceptable in a serious conversation, it might be acceptable in a joking context.  And that in turn could allow the topic to be handled seriously.  you should actively try to not hurt the other side when sharing existing or future value.  Actively means that you review the agreements and the processes before completing the negotiations.  This is quite different than passively allowing the other parties to make mistakes that are part of (or not part of) the business being negotiated.  Q: Why should I spend the time and effort to check that the other side is OK?  A: Because being part of a negotiation with a bad outcome for the counterparties will directly harm them and indirectly harm you.  In the same way that you would help a person avoid an accident on the street, as a business person, you are expected to help others avoid damaging errors.  Of course, if your negotiating partner comes to harm, others may suspect you of harming them and the result may be damage to your reputation.  Whether you are or are not guilty of harming the other party, the damage to your reputation may occur – therefore it is best for you to actively prevent damage to your reputation by helping your negotiation partners avoid damaging errors.  Additionally, if your negotiating results are too hard for the other parties to manage, they may a) go out of business;b) feel forced to break an agreement; c) refuse to do business with you in the future; or d) try to renegotiate the agreement.Any of these results means additional cost and lost time to you.Help others build value You should help the other parties in a negotiation build value in activities you are not interested in.Q: Why should I help some company make money when it does not include my company, especially if it is not even my business area?A: Because you will benefit from the improved relationship between the two companies.A: Directing the other parties towards good business ideas will not prevent you from getting full value out of the negotiations.  A: You may be able to build a more robust agreement that will not collapse or need to be renegotiated if there is an economic downturn or if unexpected problems arise.  That could save you money and time,Be ethical, but get all the value you canYour ethical actions do not prevent you from getting more value than the other side, nor from taking value that the other side does not recognize or seek or care about.  Example Let’s remember Tanba Agro and Hyogo Cake.  The cake factory finally agreed to buy the eggs.  Consider their next conversation.  Table 7.4 Ethics in actionDialog CommentTanba Agro: By the way, do you want us to take away the eggshells?Hyogo Cake: What?  We usually throw them out.Tanba Agro: That is 100kg of trash every day, we can pick them up a little cheaper than the cost of the trash service.  Hyogo Cake: OK!Tanba can use the eggs as a source of calcium for the chickens.  They will save money by taking the eggshells.  They have agreed to get a valuable item (eggshells) from Hyogo for almost free.  In your opinion, is there an ethical problem in the above conversation, or not?____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________Business negotiator’s oath of ethics: I will not actively harm another person or company with the process or results of negotiating.  I will actively check that the other parties in a negotiation are not harmed by their or my actions or agreements.Section Summary:Be sure not to harm other companies, organizations or people intentionally or unintentionally as a result of your negotiating.An ineffective negotiation occurs when there is no intention to commit to the agreement and if the negotiator only aims to beat the others with fake promises. Who Should You not Negotiate With?There are some companies and organizations you should avoid; they may cheat even if the agreement is robust.  Use your BATNA, because deals with them are bad, or very risky.  Learn about organizations you should avoid by reading and by talking to people with more experience.  Try to get positive references about an organization before starting negotiations.  Generally, avoid companies that:A) Have a reputation for very aggressive agreements and hardball tactics;a. Some big car companies, for example, are excessively demanding with suppliers regarding price, delivery schedule, response time, exclusivity, etc.b. Some large retailers force prices down to the level of minimal profit making it hard for the supplier to survive.B) Have a history of fraud or legal problems;a. Some companies have transferred Intellectual Property or secret business information to other companies or governments.  Don’t give those organizations the opportunity to sell your secrets!  Even working with organizations like that may damage your reputation.  b. Some companies have many on-going disagreements about contracts.  They may frequently be in legal court, arbitration, or in settlement actions.  Do research to find partners who have a history of completing contracts with few legal disputes.c. Some countries regularly rule against foreign companies when there is a problem – avoid doing business with organizations in those countries.C) Have unethical/illegal behaviors.a. Some companies mistreat their workers in their home country or in other countries.b. Some companies have frequently made low quality or unsafe products.c. Some companies may want to negotiate with competitors to set prices within the industry (see news article http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/27/business/9-auto-parts-makers-plead-guilty-to-fixing-prices.html?ref=business)If you must negotiate with a company of this sort, be sure to have a strong BATNA.  It may be better to use the BATNA before you start talking!Why do the “bad guys” continue to conduct business and find partners?  After decades of bad experiences, we would expect whole countries, not to mention companies, to be shunned.  Yet new companies are attracted to them despite their bad reputation and record.  The answers to this question seem to fall into these categories:1. Extremely appealing terms are offered.  Inexperienced business people may be strongly attracted by the chance to make large profit margins.  However more experienced negotiators will recognize that the offer can only be very appealing if the other side never pays out fully.  2. Many businesses think they are smart enough not to get tricked, "It won't happen to me!"3. No alternative due to weak BATNA or monopoly situation.  4. Social/political pressure requires dealing with a bad partner, at a loss, in order to gain other profitable opportunities.  Section Summary:Avoid negotiations (and close partnerships) with organizations that could hurt your business or your reputation.  
Chapter 8 – Win at home before you go  Educating the boss and Coworkers Teach your coworkers, superiors, and staff about negotiation so they can help you and additionally so they can understand your results.  You now know that a negotiator needs time and information to prepare for a negotiation.  The people who work with you may not know that.  They may not understand how much information you need to have.  They may not understand why you need to think the way your negotiation counterparties think.  Without understanding and support at home, you may not be successful.  Therefore, you will have to explain basic ideas about negotiation including the need for time and resources while preparing in advance of a negotiation. After a negotiation, you will always need to explain why the deal you got was good.  You might have to explain to your boss, your co-workers, the board of directors, or other stakeholders.  If they do not understand negotiation, they may not understand your results.  In that case, you will have to explain key concepts to them.  Section Summary:Educate your boss and coworkers to gain their support and understanding before and after the negotiation.  You will not improve the long-term success of your company if you are the only good negotiator in it! Back Table Negotiations  In your working life, negotiation tasks will generally start with requirements from your boss.  A simplified negotiation task might be, “Don’t spend more than $X, get these concessions, finish it by Friday next week.”  Notice that this sort of task assignment is lacking even enough information to complete the HIT list discussed in Chapter 4! As a negotiator, you have to understand and satisfy your back table.  In the end you will have to explain to that person or group why you agreed to the deal you got.  You can also indirectly communicate to the back table of other parties.  An Austrian business owner interviewed for this book said he always gave economic reasons for his offers that the other party could take to their boss.  A Japanese business owner in Tokyo described in an interview how she explains advantages for the other side based her knowledge of their bosses and companies.  The back back tableBehind the back table you may find the back back table, a spooky space inhabited by ghosts.  These ghosts are people or organizations that you cannot communicate with but which may have influenced your choice of outcomes or your negotiation process.  Examples of these ghosts include retired or even deceased co-workers, company founders, idealized famous personalities, political figures, and mythic business leaders.As an example, the author is aware of a Tokyo company that could not divest itself of an underperforming US bank because its acquisition had been made by an executive manager whose importance in the company was closely tied to the acquisition.  The executive had been retired for 15 years, yet the current directors would not even discuss selling the bank because it might insult that retired person.  Even though that person no longer participates in the company, he blocks the discussion to restructure.  His ghost at the table stops any movement on the issue.  Ghosts such as the one described can:- block topic areas from discussion (impose taboos);- block outcomes even if they represent practical results;- create a cognitive bias against logical problem solving.Section SummaryPay careful attention to your back table in order to move smoothly from talks to agreements.  The back table must be satisfied with your negotiation results before a proper agreement can be made.   Negotiation Error: Back Table Out of SynchIn the fictitious case below we can see how a manager brought back a result that was unsuitable for and unacceptable to upper management.   Problem Solving TechniquesMany experienced negotiators are good at problem solving.  They think creatively and react flexibly, and they know useful tools and techniques.  Some of those tools and an overall process are presented in this section.  Sometimes pressure helps creativity, an insightful business student pointed out to the authors that she was better at problem solving when pressured by having a weak BATNA.An overall process for problem solving might start with a high-level analysis of people and facts, describe problems, identify root causes of problems, and find possible solutions for discussion.  The overall process should begin long before the negotiation parties meet.  Later, however, the process should include all parties – doing so will boost communication and problem-solving power.  The sequence of steps shown below is an easy way to start, but it is not the only path.  With some practice and experience, you might find a sequence of steps you prefer more.  Table 8.1 Tools for problem solvingStep and LevelToolsPurpose1 Macro environment level Stakeholder analysis; Strength-Weakness-Opportunity-Threat (SWOT); Political-Economic-Social, Technological-Legal-Environmental (PESTLE)Establish the groups and individuals involved directly or indirectly, their level of power (the ability to influence decisions), their needs, goals, and interests.  (See Appendix VI for further explanation.)2 Project levelIshikawa diagram (fishbone)Roughly sketch the issues contributing to a problem.3 Root levelWhy-why (5 Whys)Determine trigger causes and the root causes of each issue.4 Root levelGoals and fixesIdentify what to do and achieve in order to solve the problem.5 Root and project levelsRecommendations Propose how to solve each problem.6 Project levelCreative solutions and action plansExpand the discussion from single problems to integrate related problems and solutions.  An Ishikawa program is used to identify and categorize issue contributing to a problem.  A useful diagram can be made quickly.  Generally these start with the categories shown in the diagram below: People, Policies, Equipment, and Environment, but you can change these or add to them.  The problem itself is written into the “head” of the fish (it is often called a fishbone diagram).  The diagram below for a high-speed rail line, based on a student’s work, uses the four basic categories to find causes of complaints about quality of life by residents near the rail line.    The four categories, people, policies, equipment, and environment, in the examples above are just suggestions.  They are a good starting point because they cover common problem areas.  However, when working on a negotiation problem, start with these four, but also replace and supplement them with other categories that are suitable for the problem you are working on.  After using the Ishikawa fishbone to identify the contributing problems, select one for better understanding.  Drill down into the contributing problem to find a root cause using the “Five Whys” approach developed by Toyota Motor Corporation.  Each time the why question has more than one answer, the diagram branches.  Each of these answers may continue or branch until arriving at a root cause.  Notice that different branches may come to the same answers and root causes.  Some branches finish sooner than others – so how can we know when to stop asking why?  Analysts usually follow these guidelines:- Circular (points you back to a previous why in the same branch);- No longer logically related to the original question;- Outside the range of the problem/organization; - Legal / ethical limits;- Natural limits of physics.  In the example below, the starting problem is the refusal by one party to agree to share data collected by their autonomous cars and sensors.  We ask first why that is a problem.  Then we ask why for each answer until we come to a stopping point.  In this case we appear to be finished after three levels of Why.  The diagram then shows several root causes.  Some branches join with other branches and come to the same root cause.  The root causes are starting points for fixing the original problem.  Some branches of a why-why tree come together because problems in the middle of the diagram sometimes have the same intermediate cause.  Further, a root cause might appear in more than one place.  However, branches with the same intermediate causes should end with the same root cause, or be explained in a note.  What to do and How to do itNow that the why-why has been completed with clear root causes, it is possible to add a What column at the edge of the why-why that shows in simple terms what needs to be achieved.  The What column is an easy way to communicate the clear goals that correct the root causes of the starting problem.  Additionally, the graphic communicates that some of the root causes require the same action.  In the graphic above, we have five Whats that are fixes we must undertake.  The next step is to add a How column at the edge after the Whats in order to show how to achieve the Whats.  This How column does not need to be very detailed.  It is a starting point for serious planning and joint work with the various partners in the negotiation. Now that a rough set of problems and solutions exists, you can join forces with the other negotiation parties to work out the details while creating and claiming value in a well informed process.  Creative solutions In the first five steps in the problem-solving process shown in the table “Tools for problem solving” this textbook proposes your team might work alone or with the negotiation partners.  If there is an established comfortable relationship, all steps can be done jointly.  If the relationship is not good, the first steps can be done alone, however in the last step of the problem-solving sequence the parties must unavoidably join forces.  But some might say, "Better to work on the solutions alone and be sure to get the best ones for yourself!  Don't let the other parties join!"If you consider the potential for improved ideas as well as the value of building satisfaction and relationship and the possibility for building those things through frequent interaction over problem solving, you may see good reasons for sharing the solution creating step and even most of the earlier steps.Section Summary:Use these techniques (and other approaches) to solve problems both before the negotiation and during with the participation of all other sides.   War Gaming as Preparation This textbook includes real and fictitious cases to use in learning how to prepare and execute negotiations.  Some of the cases appear as games and role playing opportunities.  Why stop playing the negotiation game at the end of this course?  In your future negotiations, the preparation team can take the roles of the counterparties in addition to their own real roles.  As your team members represent the other sides, you will: - Learn how the other side thinks;- Gain understanding of their interests;- Identify matching interests;- Identify conflicting interests.  Simulating and modeling the negotiation will help you communicate with the counterparties and help you discover how to create and claim value with them.This practice and discovery approach is sometimes called war gaming.  Red Team vs. Blue Team Organizations facing high stakes negotiations sometimes make a team for each side, for example Red and Blue teams. The Red teams will play the roles of other organizations or individuals in the negotiation with Blue taking the "home" role.  All teams work without contacting each other for an agreed period of time (days or weeks) to research interests, strategies, tactics, and issues.  When the teams meet again, they will behave as in a real negotiation presenting offers and counteroffers, proposing solutions to problems, and distributing resources as they see necessary.   Some organizations will go so far as to hire actors who look and behave like the real counterparts on the other negotiating teams. Of course this is expensive. Additional benefit – greater creativityWhen the participants in a war gaming exercise include some of the actual negotiators, the war game can be used to explore broad possibilities.  Dr. Larry Susskind (2013), writes that is becomes possible to consider "…a range of possible options that the parties might never discover under normal circumstances."  The actual negotiation, if it is very tense, may not allow the negotiators to discuss options that would bring criticism from back table observers.  However, putting the issues into an unofficial war game situation may provide the freedom to bring up, and seriously discuss, solutions that would otherwise be taboo.  The advantage is that additional solutions get consideration and may be put into play in the real negotiations that follow.  Additional benefit – intuitive thinkingWar gaming creates knowledge that is not easy to pass along and explain – we gain negotiation skills best through years of experience and interaction with highly skilled coworkers.  This kind of knowledge, tacit knowledge, does not develop quickly nor independently (Polyani, 1966; Nonaka, 1991).  However, time is a resource which may be in short supply.  Even if we have years available, it may not be possible to gather suitable experience unless there are numerous challenging negotiations annually.  Lastly, each major negotiation is likely to be unique, so how can we develop so much deeply intuitive knowledge quickly enough?Share the knowledge and experiences gained from the simulated negotiation through in depth communication among the assembled team members.  Through communicating, maximize the communication and reflection that leads to tacit knowledge in the individuals and in the team as a whole.  Conducting the negotiation more than one time will increase the gain of experience and uncover various possibilities to create and claim value.The war gaming approach will help you and your team to develop the deep, unspoken and intuitive knowledge that will lead you and your staff to quick and sure action at the real event.  Section Summary:Simulating a negotiation with your own staff playing the counterparties will help with understanding the possible interests and solutions.  Further, you may improve team performance in speed and mutual understanding.   Financial ModellingWhen negotiating, make use of financial projections supported by spreadsheets and financial modelling software.  These can include spreadsheets that you develop or models used in your organization.  Oracle’s CrystalBall software is a widely used general purpose package of financial models which can be used to create financial projections.  DecisionShare software from Integratto is particularly useful for assessing uncertain numbers such as the level of sales, costs or profits associated with a product or service.  Without knowing the exact number of units that will be sold, profits and costs are similarly hard to establish.  Additionally, DecisionShare helps to analyze, display, and rank the importance and sensitivity of elements in a complex negotiation.  For example, the software might reveal that a feature such as cost or estimates of sales or price point is of greatest impact.  The parties can then agree how to resolve the issue before it becomes a block to the negotiation.  In addition to the tools mentioned, a variety of calculators and financial tools can be found on websites for free use.  One of these is Spliddit (www.spliddit.org).  Spliddit helps users to divide a group of items that are of unequal value and which the individuals may value differently.  For example, if three siblings inherit a house, a cat, a car, and an old diamond ring.  They can turn these things into cash, but then the objects will be lost…and of course the cat has no cash value.  With Spliddit, the parties attach a number from 0 to 1,000 to each item to show their feeling about its value.  Spliddit then calculates the fairest division of the objects based on personal evaluations.  Section Summary:When negotiation requires prediction of uncertain financial numbers, use software tools to simulate.  Then choose the actions that will have the best results.  Chapter 1 
Chapter 9 – What kind of negotiator…  …are you? …are they?How do you resolve disputes?The Thomas-Kilmann Conflict Mode model is widely used to describe how conflict is resolved.  The model compares how assertive a party is to how cooperative a party is regarding any issue.  The model can be used to judge your own approach on any one issue or the approach by a counter party to an issue.  The concepts in the model have the following meaning:Competing means: 	taking a distributive, win-lose approach without joint wins;Avoiding means: 	delaying or never discussing an issue;Accommodating means:	accepting proposals of the other parties with little or no change;Compromising means: 	sharing some benefits and disadvantages among the parties;Collaborating means: 	working together on solutions and plans.Note that Collaborating falls short of creating "synergy" as discussed in Chapter 3, in the section on Principle Based Negotiation.  Synergy means that completely new joint plans and value are created together.Of course, your choices based on the above chart will change depending on the issue and the context around the issue.  However, you should be able to identify and understand your general preferences and the preferences of your counterparties.  Emotional StyleEach person has an emotional style.  Some are more relaxed, warm, insistent, empathic, introverted, or extroverted.  Knowing more about yourself, your team, and your counterparts will help you adjust to their style and improve communication.  After you have learned about yourself and your own way of doing things, you can think about how to manage co-workers or counterparts.  Each will have their own style, if you can recognize it, you may be able to work with them more comfortably and successfully.  The table below will help you select the right approach for different types.AssertiveAssertive teammates may reinforce each other's assertiveness.  Weakly assertive individuals may find that together they are more effective at putting their ideas into the conversation.  On the other hand, strongly assertive teammates may become overpowering, smothering ideas that could come from other parties.  Section summeryLearn about yourself and your counterparties in order to best manage your approaches and the behaviors of the counterparties.   Cognitive BiasUnderstanding yourself as a negotiator also means you must understand how you think.  The term "cognitive bias" means influences on thinking that can lead to errors.  These errors are important to understand and avoid because they may lead to poor decision making.  There are many kinds of cognitive bias, some that are of interest to negotiators are described below.Table 9.2 Types and impacts of cognitive biasType of bias	ExplanationNegotiation impact (examples)Anchoring Starting with a high sale price or low purchase price can create a bias that shifts the entire price discussion to move within a limited range.  Anchoring is effective if the other parties are not familiar with the concept and do not re-anchor.  If another party anchors far from your target, simply re-anchor in the opposite direction in order to neutralize their anchor.  Confirmation/Expectation BiasInterpreting data based on what you expect it to be, for example expecting winter to be cold and wearing a coat even on a warm day.Thinking that the other sides are friendly and not reacting appropriately when they show unfriendly behaviors.Emotional biasSympathy or distaste for a person, team or topic may impact decisions.  Negotiators may make agreements that do not optimize gains or cooperation.Framing Overall presentation of an issue or idea (i.e. positive/negative; urgent/non-urgent; important/less important).  Expressing a problem as "a chance to work together on solutions" is much more positive than presenting it as a difficulty.  Research (Neale & Bazerman, 1985) shows that positive framing leads to higher mutual gains than negative framing.  Law of Small Numbers (representativeness)A small sample is inappropriately interpreted as widely true (Tversky and Kahnemann, 1971).A negotiator must insist on high quality data (i.e. new, clearly explained, detailed and not aggregated) and must interpret that data carefully.  Skills in statistics are appropriate and negotiators should take the time, even if inconvenient, to understand data.Optimism/OverconfidenceExpecting to gain more than is likely.  Research (Neale & Bazerman, 1985) shows that negotiators who expect to gain are less likely to make concessions and make agreements.  Negotiators may feel dissatisfaction despite a good agreement.Raising the expectations of the back table unreasonably.Prejudice Failing to take new information into account because of existing ideas about the subject.Rejecting the solutions proposed by certain people because your culture expects those people to have poor business thinking.  Undervaluing BiasConcessions are not evaluated accurately, instead they are evaluated lower than their real worth.  Because concessions are often undervalued by the receiving party, it is useful to make numerous small concessions rather than a single one.Vivid Information BiasResponding too strongly to data that are striking (Nesbitt and Ross, 1980).  Example: we may be afraid of flying because air accidents are front page news involving large numbers of people.  In fact, however, air travel is much safer than road travel by most measures.Skilled negotiators must not overvalue shocking or surprising points of information.  Example of framingA small tech company, Zing Inc., is entering negotiations with a large, well known globalized electronics maker, Pineapple Corp.  Compare the framing in the table below.Section Summary:Good business thinking is not always strictly logical and emotionless.  However, try to identify and avoid bias in your thinking that could lead to mistakes.   Bias and decision makingThe ideal decision-making process is one that is conducted in multiple steps without time pressure by experienced people.  When time and resources are limited, the process is often compressed or shortened with poor decision making as a result.  Even under the best conditions, the decision makers can fall into cognitive bias.  *** Lewicki and Hiam 2011 “Mastering Business Negotiation: A Working Guide to Making Deals and…” says step one – identify the problem, pg 141 (blurs identifying and defining; correctly notes that joint work is necessary) Step 2  - undertand the prob; step 3 generate solutions Teamwork On a soccer team, there are players who specialize in defending or attacking; they take positions like goal keeper, striker, and so on.  However, even specialized players must always defend and attack as necessary – the positions and duties overlap.  A negotiation team can work similarly.  Some team members can specialize regarding certain issues, but members in any position should be able to support each other in practical ways.Unlike soccer, small teams are generally best in negotiation unless there are many very complex topics.  Generally, a negotiation team should have one or two specialists or technical people, a knowledgeable generalist, and a decision maker (usually a manager authorized to make certain decisions).  The actions of the team members must overlap as they support each other.  The team may have many members, but they do not all have to go to the negotiation table.Similarly, the members of a negotiation team work together by: a) having special positions, and b) supporting each other in all the team’s positions.  Some positions may not be in frequent contact with the rest of the team when it is interacting with other parties.  For example, Final Decision Makers, Liaisons, and Champions may not interact with the other sides and may not observe the interaction.  The following suggested positions are for teams (Baber 2018b).  Leader (Lead Negotiator/Chief Negotiator) :* Agrees agenda, * Keeps agenda on track* Acts to resolve or avoid deadlock * Agrees to final proposal* Supports specialists when they are leading the conversation* Maintains alignment of the talks and outcomes with the goals of the Final Decision MakersTeam Member: * May be specialists or generalists* Specialists usually lead the conversation when those special topics are in discussion* Agrees to a specific point when criteria are met (or signals the leader to agree)* Supports leader and other team members when they are leading the conversation* Helps with analysis and decision making during interactions and in private sessions with the team Observer: * Watches the interaction and gains an overview of the progress, gains, and errors of the team; may not necessarily speak and interact with counterparties* Observes the personalities and style of the counterparties* Evaluates the skills and abilities of the members* Advises and coaches the team after sessionsFinal Decision Maker* Makes the final decision to accept or reject the negotiated agreement * This person or group may be part of the negation team at the table, especially if the organization is small or if the negotiation is strategically importantLiaison/Champion: * Communicates the progress and needs of the team to higher management* This position is more useful when the team leader lacks time or organizational standing to communicate well with higher management* A champion additionally promotes the team’s work at the level of higher management to ensure that the necessary resources are available for the team’s successOther supporters: * Undertake tasks that help the team such as conducting research or answering technical questionsThird party: * The third party intervenes (invited or assigned) to help negotiations that are difficult, deadlocked, very complex or which otherwise require support.  The third party can be a mediator, facilitator, arbitrator, judge or some informal combination of these.  The third party can also be a group or panelThe team positions identified above do not necessarily have to be separate people.  One person might take more than one of those positions.  It is possible to have a successful team that has no positions and all members are generalists.  A team of that sort usually has been working together for a long time developing experience in cooperation and learning how to function smoothly.  As a result it may be able to delegate its tasks without a leader or specialists.  Q: What does it mean to support other team members?A: It means you must carefully follow the talking and your team’s overall plan.  If you notice a problem, an opportunity, a mistake, new information, etc. you need to communicate it to your team members.  You can do this by:* Silently writing a brief note and passing it to other team members;* Quietly and briefly speaking to a team member;* Directly speaking to the counterparty about it.  This kind of communication is called supportive interaction (Vuorela, 2005).  Vuorela gives these examples: * “The sellers ensure that all their arguments are covered with the help of teamwork, with different members of the team contributing to the on-going discussion at different times.” * “They also take turns at times repeating an argument a co-team member put forth earlier, and sometimes this seems enough to convince the buyers of their argument.” Q: Is teamwork good for getting all the arguments and opinions out openly?A: Yes.  “Teamwork is a useful tool in covering the ‘full front’ when pursuing an argument with every member of the sales team bringing forth a different angle of the argument” (Vuorela, 2005).  For example, if the conversation moves to another topic before all the key points have been discussed, a team member can carefully interrupt and return to the unfinished topic.  Teams that have members who are skeptical or disruptive of the agreement gain the benefit of dealing with hard challenges.  These challenges may help the team avoid errors in the agreement.  Q: Is it OK to talk with your team members during a negotiation?A: Generally, you should use some internal talk but avoid talking too much because it will distract others.  You can put in a word or brief comment or question, if your team is used to this behavior.  Also, you can talk with your teammates loudly and clearly in a way that the counterparties can join.  However, internal conferences with long whispering are generally poor etiquette.  If you need a conference with your team, politely ask the other side to give you a few minutes of privacy, or propose a general break for refreshments.  Use the break time to coordinate with your teammates.Using note paper or tablet devices to communicate internally is effective, and not very distracting to teammates and counterparties.  Be sure that your teammates can comfortably use such methods by practicing before trying it at the negotiating table.  Q: What is “team building”?A: It means becoming good at working together.  This happens by practicing and discussing the strategies and details together in depth.  A team leader needs strong listening skills in order to understand the individual members and identify the skills and strengths of the team and attempt to make weak areas stronger.  At the same time the team leader needs to understand the goals of the individuals in order to align them with the goals of the team and the company.  In addition to frequent meetings (one to one and as a group), having a casual meal or drinks together helps to build team function.  If the team is created specifically for the negotiation, it may be possible to select compatible team members based on their personalities and skills.  Teams need frequent interaction and communication in order to share their knowledge effectively.  The sharing of knowledge builds up tacit knowledge (Polyani, 1966; Nonaka, 1991) and intuitive capacity.  With time, teams can become very fast to act and decide.  Cross cultural teamsTeams that include people from various cultures face some challenges and enjoy some advantages.  One of the most commonly identified difficulties with cross cultural teams is the increased time for communication that is necessary to get the same results.  Inexperienced managers may be surprised by lack of progress as deadlines approach.  Frequent one-to-one communication may help to establish the relationships and mutual confidence necessary for a team to work well together.Teams that are spread across many locations and which meet mainly online or by phone may experience difficulties such as time coordination, miscommunication, lack of clarity about tasks, delays, and so on.  Consider the individual’s personality and culture carefully, as some will appreciate additional communication and others will find it upsetting.  Adjust the mixture of voice, email, and other media to suit the individuals.When considering the members of a cross cultural team, the team leader might aim to gather people with similar rank, previous positive cross cultural experience, and reasonably strong skills in a common language.  Common language within the team The common tongue of business is usually English, though other languages are dominant such as Chinese in much of East Asia or French, Spanish, Turkish and Arabic in various regions.  A team that includes native and non-native speakers will need the native speakers to improve their communication skills: less slang, slower speed, careful pronunciation, simple grammar choices, for example.  At the same time, the non-native speakers may need to concentrate on their own pronunciation, choice of phrases, and ability to ask for clarification.  Gestures and use of pauses, facial expression, and humor will also need adjustment – mutually, not by one group or person only.  See Browaeys and Price's Understanding Cross-Cultural Management (2011) chapters 15-17 for additional useful comments on these topics.  Section Summary:Make sure your team understands the goals, the plan, and all the steps well.  Practice together, prepare together, communicate frequently.  
Chapter 10 – Agreements Robust agreements that can survive At the negotiating table, you should end with clear written agreements that your legal team will later finalize.  You hope that these agreements will survive as intended.  How can you make an agreement that the other parties will not reconsider and perhaps break?   How can you make a robust agreement even in a country that has a poor legal system?  How can you get cooperation from people who are distracted with other projects?  How can you make agreements that survive even if the other party is unreliable? These approaches may help:
1. Include short term incentives to continue;2. Plan actions in numerous steps or milestones that must be completed and accepted before continuing;3. Plan for payment upon completion of milestones, or only partial payment before the milestone is completed;4. Include negative outcomes to deter breaking off;5. Share value fairly and communicate about that fairness;6. Communicate the benefits and value creation of continuing;7. Plan for “predictable surprises”; 8. Communicate to be sure the other sides understand the benefit of joint cooperation;9. Create contingent agreements that change with the circumstances in a way that all sides consider fair; 10. Check the agreement for clauses that could be misinterpreted or misused and remove or improve them;11. Communicate the high probability of additional successful work in the future, or, even better, agree to future projects that follow up on the current project (build the relationship, cement the relationship.

The last item on the list started with us at the beginning of this textbook.  It is part of all good negotiation thinking from start to finish.  This is the easiest, most obvious, most effective way to increase the likelihood of cooperation and minimize the chance of breaking off or cheating.  Alan Tamblyn, general secretary of the [UK] National Council For Metal Detecting said: “Handshakes are great until something goes wrong. It is important to formalise that.”https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c72pn70p595o 
The Consensus Building Institute (http://cbuilding.org) says, “Design nearly self enforcing agreements.” That means agreements that reward completion through incentives and make non-completion unappealing through punishments or claw backs.  Dr.  Larry Susskind of MIT suggests making agreements that help against “predictable” surprises.  We know that even good ships sink, so we put lifeboats on them.  Even good agreements may be harmed by a bad economy, changes in regulation, or other “surprises” that we can reasonably expect.  Create agreements that can survive such surprises.Section Summary: Design agreements that can survive changes in the environment.  Well-designed agreements have clauses that explain what the parties will do in case of changes in the business environment.   Control mechanisms often found in negotiated agreements:After the deal has been agreed and the discussion has finished, how can you be sure that the other sides will do as agreed?  There are many ways to control the actions of negotiation parties after the talking has finished.  These can be summarized as follows:- Provide reasons (incentives) for the other sides to complete the work in a satisfactory way;- Provide reasons (disincentives) for the other parties not do incomplete, late or unsatisfactory work.  Some of the mechanisms for giving those incentives and disincentives are described below.  Milestones: Agreed intermediate points of completion.  When each milestone is reached, payments are made, and new commitments are made.  In a Joint Venture for manufacturing, milestones might include purchasing a factory site, installing utility services, construction the building, installing equipment, and so on.  Each major step is a milestone and an incentive to continue.  The opposite would be an agreement that simply describes a single completed target.  Example: "Upon completion of the Working Prototype detailed in Section 3 of this agreement, Party A will pay Party B $900,000 by bank transfer within 5 working days." Gates: Points in a project when resources are re-allocated.  An agreement with gates allows the parties to commit resources when necessary and suitable instead of committing major resources years in advance.  The advantages include flexibility, and the ability to withdraw if a project fails.  Example:"After completion and acceptance of Phase 3 of the contract, the parties agree to discuss allocation of resources for Phase 5 including the following points …."Incentives: Reasons, usually financial, for a party to perform above the minimum required in an agreement.  For example, a party that completes a task a week in advance might receive 5% more in payment.  Example:"Completion of installation of the equipment more than 5 working days in advance of the schedule set out in Paragraph 7 of this contract will entitle party A to an additional payment of 5% by Party B within the payment terms of Paragraph 12 of this contract." Claw backs: Agreements to return part or all of a payment if a task is not done as required.  These agreements protect one party if the other party does not perform well.Example: “In agreement with Section 17a of this document, Party A will pay Party B $10,000 in order to cover startup costs associated with the project.  Should the target of $80,000 gross sales not be reached by November 31st, Party A reserves the right to insist that Party B repay 75% of the $10,000 startup costs paid by Party A, totaling $7,500.”  Punishments and penalties: The opposite of incentives.  Typical punishments include receiving less payment if a task is completed late or with low quality.  Example: “Party A will receive only 90% of the sum in Section 7 (b) if the polishing work is not completed with 30 business days after the date of the agreement of this contract.” Contingent clauses: These are built on "if" structures.  Example: “Party A will conduct the E17 test procedure if Party B is unable to complete development of the substrate by December 17th, 2016.” Renegotiation clauses: If conditions change the parties can return to a negotiation instead of facing a drastically unbalanced business situation.  In this way both parties can avoid situations that could be very destructive of their business, and avoid the need to unilaterally break the agreement.Example: The parties shall reconvene to discuss Section 3 of this Agreement should the price of gold decrease below $1100 for longer than one week.  Renewal clauses: These allow the parties to continue the business if a major change to a product is made such as a new edition of software or a reference book.Example:In the case that Party A updates the Software Product, they will inform Party B in advance of the update.  Party B will have the first opportunity to agree to continue or renegotiate the current agreement within five working days of receiving notification from Party A.And of course…don't agree to pay fully in advance! Section Summary:Create good agreements that encourage success through fair sharing, incentives, communication, and high likelihood of future activities.  Use control mechanisms that all sides agree are fair in order to encourage the parties to proactively solve problems and avoid difficulties. When agreements don't survive: Outside support, Mediation, ArbitrationNegotiation does not always result in great agreements and satisfied partners.If the agreements are poorly designed with gaps in understanding, no enforcement mechanisms, and no tools to repair a disagreement, the partners may want to renegotiate some or all of the agreement.  That of course costs more time, money and energy…so it is better to develop good agreements in the first place!When to renegotiate You can expect your business partners to renegotiate an agreement if some or any of the following conditions exist: * A drastic change in the economic environment occurs;* Availability of resources changes;* New regulation or legislation impacts the business activity;* Political atmosphere changes;* Disasters or wars occur;* Supply or demand adjusts drastically;* Supply chain collapses;* Renegotiation is part of the culture or personality of a party;* Relationship considerations change with respect to economic needs.In some cultures and companies, renegotiation is considered to be a bad outcome or even a failure.  In others however, renegotiation is seen as a way to expand the relationship and the business activity.  Therefore, business people should be willing to renegotiate in order to improve a business agreement and relationship.  However, it is even better to write good agreements that need little renegotiation.In any case, renegotiating part or all of an agreement is better than allowing the agreement to collapse.  Recall the case of Starbucks and Kraft discussed previously.  It would have been most sensible for Starbucks to have renegotiated before breaking the agreement.  In fact, their failure to renegotiate and their failure to honor the agreement cost them more than the profits earned by breaking the agreement.  What if the parties cannot come to terms despite trying to renegotiate and the agreement collapses?  It may be time to call in a 3rd party that will act as a neutral helper.  Process facilitators, mediators, and consultantsFacilitators, mediators and consultants are paid outsiders, usually negotiation professionals, hired to move negotiations along.  Usually they are selected by mutual agreement among the negotiating parties because they are experienced, respected, and trained.  They may regulate the flow of discussion like a traffic policeman regulates a busy intersection, they may ensure the negotiation process is fair, they may certify that information is correct by accessing confidential information on all sides.  They usually do not deal with deeply substantive issues; however, they help the parties voice their views, actively listen to each other, and they can help the parties create solutions through use of problem-solving techniques.  Mediation, facilitation, and consulting is generally done with careful regard for the neutrality.  Even though these professionals are normally hired by mutual agreement as neutral outsiders, they will emphasize their neutrality in various ways, for example, by sitting in the middle of the parties, not with one group or another.  Additionally, they may offer confidential conversations with one or all sides in order to better understand the thinking, positions, and goals of the parties.  A careful observer will understand that a mediator or facilitator can never be truly neutral or impartial – participation in the problems and parties is what makes a mediator effective.  A useful overview of mediation, including a general set of rules, can be found on the website of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) at http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation.  Buddhist mediationBuddhist mediators attempt to facilitate resolution of disputes by applying Buddhist practices such as: - Awareness of self (mindfulness): Mindfulness refers to keeping overall awareness of multiple facts, positions, opinions etc. as objects in the mind, including one's personal thoughts and feelings, as objects separate from the self or the situation.  Mindfulness supports attention (Burke, 2010), analysis, comprehension and the creative development of solutions (Ostafin and Kassman, 2012).- Separation of self from the emotions and pressures and statements of the problem: Separation allows the individual not to become attached to positions, events, feelings, demands, personalities and so.  No longer attached to a specific issue or detail, the parties can evaluate their goals and the goals of other parties more objectively.- Awareness of interdependencies: Parties learn that the best solutions are ones that include the participation and satisfaction of all sides to the greatest extent possible.  Without interdependent action and resolution, it is very like that one or more parties will reject the results immediately or later.  - Awareness of options for problem solving: As the above processes develop, the parties, including the mediator, become more easily able to create solutions that may have been perceived as impossible, taboo, or unattainable before.  Even very unlikely proposals may provide elements that appear in the ultimate solution.  These practices are explained and taught to the mediation parties as necessary when the mediation begins and throughout the process.  While these approaches may be appropriate in areas with strongly Buddhist cultures, they may also be welcomed in North America and Europe.  Some approaches that have been used among Buddhist mediators in the English speaking world include (Kramarae, 2013):* Understanding-based mediation approach* Insight Mediation Framework* Nonviolent Communication (NVC) Framework* Consensus Making Framework Islamic mediationMediation in the Islamic world is based on Sharia, the system of laws stemming from Koranic teaching.  The term wasaata is widely used and the process puts focus on gaining an outcome that will bring disputing parties to a peaceful resolution.  The wasaata process is intended to include comprehensiveness and flexibility (Bouheraoua, 2008) especially through the mediator’s fairness, appropriate knowledge, and possible intervention.  Furthermore, the wasaata process involves the wider community whereas mediation and arbitration in the European and North American tradition are usually limited to the immediate participants (Pely, 2011).  Ideally, the mediation includes reconciliation, sulha, in order to bring about a state in which the parties are expected to have no further disagreement or bad feeling.  Wasaata is not a process specifically for business, though business disputes may be managed by a wasaata – sulha process.  External experts and fact-finders Experts and fact-finders may be asked to help when the negotiators lack the knowledge, time, or skill to investigate a question fully.  In some cases, a third party may be brought in from another organization, a consulting company, a university, government, or a competitor, to provide information in a neutral and objective way.  The negotiators expect that additional data and neutral interpretations will help them to find solutions – external experts and fact finders are usually not included in the negotiation process and do not directly participate in problem solving.  Ideally, fact-finding processes should happen early in the negotiation process, however in reality, they are often started when the parties have run into a block because they need more information.Ombudsman The ombudsman (or ombudsperson) is found inside an organization and may be useful if your negotiation is internal to that organization (for example in the context of labor negotiations).  Their job is to make sure that the process of negotiating an internal disagreement is fair.  They seek to resolve problems early before they involve higher levels of management and more resources.  The ombudsperson is relatively independent despite being inside the organization.  The neutrality of the ombudsperson is usually not in question because they do not make binding decisions – they only help the parties to understand.  The ombudsperson might however propose resolutions to the parties in a dispute as well as to upper level management in order to help the organization avoid similar problems in the future.  Disputes: Arbitration or courtArbitration is not a negotiation process, it is more similar to a court process.  Arbitration is a formal process for resolving a dispute and binding the parties to solutions.  After arbitration, the relationship between the parties may be too damaged to re-engage in new business projects.  Therefore, it is better to try negotiation, mediation and other options before starting arbitration.  Because arbitration is a formal process, it is more expensive than negotiation or mediation, though usually less expensive than a legal court.  1. The parties to arbitration agree in advance to accept the ruling and the solution of the arbitrator.  2. The parties agree to an arbitrator or a team of arbitrators that they view as neutral but qualified.  3. The parties and arbitrators agree to a process, usually with strict rules about presenting documents, arguments, and counter arguments.  4. The parties prepare and submit documents and summaries of their positions.5. Usually there is a facilitated face to face verbal discussion.6. After the discussion, often weeks or months later, the arbitrators will deliver a decision which is legally binding.7. It may be necessary to complete a follow-up legal action in the other country to enforce the decision of arbitration court.  Arbitration and courts may have strict requirements about processes such as presentation of arguments, presentation of evidence, statements of experts, making of offers, and other actions.  Participants must follow these processes precisely.Arbitration tends to be less expensive, less complicated, and less risky than court.  However the costs of arbitration and court may motivate the parties to return to negotiation.  The parties in an arbitration or court process face a higher risk than they do in negotiation because there are fewer compromise positions and all or nothing win/lose situations are more likely.  A careful risk analysis by the parties may motivate them to return to negotiation.Section Summary:When negotiations fail or become deadlocked, use alternative methods to restart the process.  Agreeing through negotiation, however, will usually be the least formal and least expensive way to reach agreements. Draft Agreements or Binding AgreementsDraft agreements indicate intent and binding agreements are “in force” when signed.  The parties should agree whether their agreement will be a draft document or a final, binding document.  If it is a draft, the parties will usually have final versions completed by legal staff.  On the other hand, a binding agreement can be made at the negotiating table if the parties wish.  Negotiators who prefer detailed complex legal agreements may not feel comfortable with a binding agreement completed at the table.  They will probably prefer to have a final version completed later by legal staff.Draft agreements can be general or specific.  Some individuals and some cultures will prefer more or less detailed documents.  Generally speaking, the Anglo-American cultures prefers detailed agreements and negotiations.  The written documents, draft or final, can be many pages in length.  The advantages of a detailed document include greater clarity and therefore fewer issues that will need to be discussed, explainer or renegotiated later.  A detailed agreement might cover the following items or more: Table 10.1 Agreement components- Compliance- Confidentiality - Contributions from all parties- Damages- Dispute resolution- Enforcement- Exclusivity including sector, channel, territory- Force majeure- Improved versions, new editions etc.- Infringement- Liability- Organizational structure/ownership- Parties- Payment terms, i.e. in advance, upon completion, by milestone etc.- Purpose- Representations, Warranties and Covenants- Risk, eg inflation risk, currency risk, political risk, etc.- Scheduling - Share of profits/ Compensation- Tasks for implementation, obligations- Term (length of time the agreement will continue)- Termination- Transfer of obligation- Units of measurement- Waivers
Other cultures, especially Latin, Pacific, and East Asian cultures, often prefer general agreements that show intent and broad commitment.  These documents may be quite short, just a few pages.  As an example, of the authors’ part time contract with a university in Japan filled barely two pages.  A similar agreement with a university in Canada filled 16 pages!This textbook however recommends detailed agreements in order to minimize opportunities for misunderstanding and dispute.  Well-designed agreements can save time and cost over the long term.  Some agreement documents you might work with include:Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) or Letter of Intent (LOI)An MOU or LOI is usually not written with high detail.  It is usually not legally binding.  The purpose of the document is to describe the spirit of a cooperative agreement and, broadly, how the cooperation will function.  It should not detail the work or commitments of the parties. ContractA contract is highly structured and is binding once the legal representatives of the organizations have signed it.  A contract might contain the following sections as noted in Bradlow and Finkelstein (2013):- Recitals: Identifies the companies and substance of the agreement.  - Definitions: Defines words, especially technical jargon used.- Business Terms: Core issues of who, what, where, when, cost, etc.- Representations and Warranties: Statements of fact such as “the factory at 33 Maple St. can support equipment weighing up to 2 tons per square meter.”- Covenants and agreements: Generally these are promises to perform.  - Conditions: These include conditions that must be met, such as inspections, before the agreement comes into force.- Indemnification: Liabilities from failure to perform the covenants and agreements.- Miscellaneous: May include clauses about termination, renegotiation and so on.  - Attachments and schedules: These may include lists of equipment, facilities, staff, property or other materials important to the agreement.  Reviewing an agreement You should review agreements carefully before signing.  Look for: * Wording that is very limiting or too vague; * Wording that a bad actor could intentionally misinterpret;* Third party roles that could confuse responsibility;* Clear definitions of ideas and things; * Reasonable rights; * Hidden liabilities; * Unbalanced benefits; and * Schedules that might be too difficult to attain.  An additional check should be made from the point of view of a bad actor or “black hat” party that wants to abuse the agreement: look for ways to exploit wording or possibilities to gain more value than expected or intended. If possible, have a legal expert review the document.  Agreement text examples For examples of text (free or for fee) that can be used in agreements, please visit some of the following websites:  General:http://www.wipo.int/http://www.lawmart.com/ https://www.lawinsider.com Dispute resolution:http://www.jamsadr.com/http://www.iccwbo.org/http://www.huschblackwell.comConfidentiality: http://www.bitlaw.com/forms/nda.htmlhttps://www.cdr-news.com/Section Summary:Create agreements that cover details to the satisfaction of all parties.  Agree to create draft agreements that are non-binding to allow time for review by legal professionals.  
Chapter 11 – Review from a high altitudeWhat is the overall thinking and approach, the heart and mind of negotiation we need to follow?  Lax and Sebenius say “Think strategically, act opportunistically”.  To do so, they suggest the following strategic approach:* Assess set up barriers:o Thoroughly map all the parties, their interests, and their BATNAs.o Decide sequence and process.* Assess barriers to agreement.* Assess tactical and interpersonal barriers.* Overcome these barriers by mapping backward from the target deal by making a 3D Strategy:o Set up the right negotiation content and goals.o Design value creating possibilities.o Emphasize problem solving as a joint approach.Adapted from 3D negotiating, Lax & Sebenius, 2006, pg 237Acting opportunistically means being flexible and ready to change your ideas in order to get the best results.“Only effective preparation and focused action make the difference—and in our experience, the best preparation is mastering the principles of 3-D Negotiation.” 3D Negotiation, Lax & Sebenius, 2006, pg 19Your goal: “create and claim value for the long term” 3D negotiating, Lax & Sebenius, 2006, pg 237Another way of thinking about the overall goal and purpose of business negotiation is to think, "Let's maximize value and solve problems and avoid failure."  Maximizing value means putting new value creation before distribution of resources and rewards.  Solving problems means creatively removing barriers to agreement and developing value creating ideas.  Avoiding failure means designing agreements that are workable, enforceable, and profitable.   Lifecycle of negotiation An overall negotiation process can be blocked into six phases.  Each phase has events and documents that show it has finished and that the next is underway.  The process can come to an end at any point in a phase or at a phase boundary.  The process can return to a previous phase, however it is not possible for the process to skip a phase.  At the end of the fifth and sixth phases, it is possible for the process to restart with new topics and deals (Baber, 2018a).The activities within the first five phases can be roughly broken down in processes as in the figure below.  These processes may repeat and cycle, but the overall movement is from left to right, from earliest beginnings of planning and research to evaluation and, sometimes, expansion and continued negotiation.   Example of a negotiation through the phasesThe table below refers to negotiations around the Ichthys off shore liquid natural gas project.  The table refers to only one part of this complex of negotiations, namely the process of assembling the finances for the project.  The project is located in the Indian Ocean, some 200 km from Perth, Australia.  The agreement includes many shareholders, investments of $20 billion, and is planned to continue for more than 40 years. Table 11.1 Ichthys - highly complex negotiationPhase Action(s)Ichthys Offshore Natural Gas Project Value Network Fit PhaseConsidered shareholders, equity shares, suppliers, actions of competitors, supply and demand forecasting, etc.  The parties considered which companies would provide major services and which would lead the project.  Parties reported to be considering equity shares, Summer 2010 (Osaka Gas Journal, https://www.ogj.com/articles/2010/08/inpex-mulls-sale-of.html) Deal Design PhaseCrafted various deals for themVarious deals and percentage investment and profit were considered.  Groups formed and reformed.  Tokyo Gas leads, Total, Inpex and others considered whether to take leading or supporting roles.  Their ideas and proposals developed over time (see articles at https://www.ogj.com).  InteractionTalked and jointly crafted agreementsFinally, one of the parties, INPEX, formally completed its internal Final Investment Decision, Jan.  2012.  Partnerships considered, and agreed, sales of equity Summer, 2012 (Osaka Gas Journal, https://www.ogj.com/articles/2012/07/total-increases-stake-in-ichthys-lng-project.html)The parties develop the finance agreement included interactions with eight export credit agencies and 24 commercial banks leading up to the Project Finance Agreement (see INPEX Annual report 2013).Ratification PhaseExecutive decision makers agree (or disagree and cycle the document back to talks)The legal counsels of the parties reviewed the Project Finance Agreement and, after agreeing to some changes, the CEOs and boards of those organizations ratified the agreement.  Project Finance Agreement signed, Dec.  2012. (INPEX Annual report 2013)Evaluation and Monitoring PhaseEnact, monitor, evaluate the negotiation and outcomesProduction begins in 2018; from this point forward, the parties will check that everyone is fulfilling their obligations and that the agreement is working as expected.  Follow-up PhaseSubsequent negotiations re suppliers, contractors, schedules etc.  Purchasing agreements, delivery contracts, contracts related to maintaining and improving delivery and production infrastructure need to be created.  In addition to those B2B agreements, negotiations with local government and citizen groups take place.Agreements and renegotiations may be re-negotiated and adjusted as regulation or economic environment evolve. Practical list of don’ts At the end of our review of the negotiation process, we can come to a practical "do not" list:Do not rush.Do not be snowed under by data.Do not be too greedy.Do not harm others.Do not give something for nothing.Do not fail to learn.Do not fail to prepare.Do not rushPush deadlines back with superiors, clients, partners and other negotiating parties.  Allow more time rather than less time in order to solve problems and create relationships that will survive fruitfully.  Do not be snowed under by dataDo not allow large amounts of data to confuse you.  Data is not useful until categorized and analyzed.  Use careful decision making processes and appropriate business analysis.  Learn to categorize information so that you are not distracted by too much data.  Do not be too greedyLearn to capture a reasonable amount of value so that you do not damage other parties in the negotiation.  A reasonable approach will cause your reputation as fair negotiator to develop.Do not harm othersNever directly harm another party because your reputation will suffer.  Worse, you may become a target for others trying to damage you and your business.  Instead, learn to create satisfaction in all parties.Do not give something for nothingGiving something for nothing drains your resources.  Gaining from your concessions means the gains must be of comparable value.  The gains can be tangible (assets and resources) or intangible (relationship, reputation, brand, strategic position, etc.).  Do not fail to learnEvery negotiation, successful or unsuccessful, is a source of learning.  Evaluate the negotiation in detail in the middle, shortly after completion of the negotiation, and again when the agreement is being executed.Do not fail to prepareThere will be few successes in your career if you do not deeply know the details of the issues and the stakeholders related to it.  Know the people, know the facts!Section Summary:An overall process starts with research and finishes with robust agreements.  In between are many repeated steps if communicating, solving problems, and deciding.  Each step is an opportunity to learn, create value, and find satisfaction among the participants.
Chapter 12 – Reflection on negotiation theory This book aims to explain negotiation in practical ways to build up skills that students can put to immediate use.  However, students and educators are welcome to consider the theory and academic understanding of negotiation behind our book.  This chapter briefly presents the central theories behind negotiation.Negotiation is based on two or more parties interacting in order to come to agreement.  The Theory of Cooperation and Competition (Deutsch, 1973) says that the parties largely choose to cooperate or compete depending on the relative importance of the issues and the atmosphere around the discussion.  The Dual Concern Theory (D. G. Pruitt & J. Z. Rubin, 1986) compares the weight the negotiators assign to their interests and the interests of others.  These theories contribute to the five strategy model discussed in this textbook.Theory generally places negotiation within the field of conflict resolution as an activity around the resolution of problems that may play out in mediation, courtroom, or various kinds of talks.  However, there are key points to recognize.  Among these is that the participants in a negotiation have joined voluntarily.  Participants in litigation, arbitration, etc.  may or may not have joined voluntarily and disputes underlie these interactions.   VoluntarinessThe parties in negotiations may have compelling practical reasons to work together, but they can choose not to.  Therefore, in negotiation, the parties are voluntarily working together.  The opposite situation is generally true in court cases (litigation) where one or more parties have no choice about continuing or leaving.  In negotiation, a party can leave if they feel there is a better choice than negotiating.  Because the parties are interacting willingly, negotiation means that the agreement has to be unanimous.  If the parties do not all agree, there can be no agreement.  Of course, a unanimous agreement might not be completely satisfying to those parties.  In that case a party might not do what the agreement requires – failure to execute the agreement means the negotiation was a partial or complete failure.  The figure below shows how negotiation can lead to completion of agreements, or failure.According to the above diagram, agreements that satisfy the parties, and even other stakeholders, are more fully implemented and have a higher rate of completion than agreements that do not satisfy the participants as well.  The logical conclusion that this theory leads to, is that negotiators must work supportively and cooperatively with the other parties in order to get the best agreements.  Nonetheless, some parties will emphasize their own gains and thereby decrease the satisfaction of the other side to the minimum point necessary for them to complete the agreement.  If the satisfaction decreases further, however, they will not agree, or if they do, they will not fully complete the agreement without further negotiation, legal action or other steps.  Another key point is that in negotiations, there may or may not be a dispute.  Thus, Raiffa (2002) places negotiations in the field of decision making.  Negotiations, especially regarding commercial business, usually involve a deal, a mutually beneficial package of obligations, contributions, concessions, and goals.  Negotiations that include third party mediators or facilitators may take place for the purpose of dispute resolution or deal creation.   UtilityIn order to understand solutions that increase or decrease satisfaction, negotiators consider the relative utility of the issues they negotiate.  Utility Theory (Fishburn, 1970) refers to the relative values that one or more parties place on things.  At the basis of this theory is the belief that individuals can determine and rank the value of multiple things.  For example, it may seem that $10,000 has the same value for everyone because it can be used to purchase $10,000 worth of goods or services.  In Utility Theory, however, the parties may have different ideas about the value of $10,000.  For a small organization or a person with little money it might mean the difference between success and bankruptcy.  For a large organization, however, $10,000 might have little impact on their planning or their profits.  Because the parties have different values, they may come to convenient exchanges by coordinating what they value more or less.  Therefore, it is vital to understand the value you place on resources and issues as well as the values other parties place on issues and resources.  In order to understand the utility you attach to an issue, you must compare it to other issues: the value of something is understood in the context of the things around it.  To help understand the relative utility values of multiple issues, negotiators may take the following two steps:1. The total value of the issues to be discussed is set equal to 100.  2. The 100 value points are divided among the issues with important issues getting more.  For example, in a negotiation about time, money, and raw resources a party might assign more value to time, less to money, and much less to the resources, depending on what they need more urgently.  The other parties’ ideas might be similar, or quite different.   StrategyIn negotiation, strategy refers to one of five overall approaches to a negotiation; Compromise, Collaborate, Accommodate, Compete, and Avoid.  Negotiators choose a strategy based on two different feelings about issues.  The first is their evaluation about how important the issue is.  The second is their judgement about how important the relationship to the other parties is.  In negotiation, this is explained by Lewicki, Hiam and Olander (1996) as relationship versus substance.  Additionally, strategy can be explained as conflict style by comparing the negotiator’s strength of feelings about their own issues as compared to the other parties’ issues (Thomas & Kilmann, 1974).  The five conflict styles are similar to the strategies discussed in negotiation.  Negotiators’ evaluations and judgements, naturally, do not remain fixed throughout a negotiation.  As parties communicate and learn, and as the environment changes, the understandings about the other parties (relationships) and the resources and issues (substance) change dynamically for better or worse.  As a result, the choice of strategy is not fixed.  Strategy, therefore, is a not a fixed and limiting behavior, it is a dynamic and evolving series of behavior choices. RelationshipRelationships are built partly on the norm of reciprocity, a feedback loop that reinforces the positive or negative cycle of interactions.  When parties aim to create win-win results, they are likely to develop a closer and more positive relationship.  Generally, positive relationships lead to more information sharing and thus better problem solving as well as greater creation of mutual value, especially when the relationship matures into a “working relationship” (Pruitt & Carnevale, 1993).  A positive cycle of relationship building typically leads to good relationships and these lead to better mutual outcomes for negotiators.  Empathy, the ability to share the feelings of other parties, allows relationships to grow faster and stronger.In integrative negotiations where both sides can optimize their utility, good relationships are usually beneficial to all parties.  In distributive negotiations, however, where one party gains at the other’s expense, a good relationship may result in greater loss as one side manipulates the other to exchange relationship for substance.  Thus, in order to protect oneself, relationships, empathy and impressions should be seen as something to be managed.  Impressions, for example, can be managed to make a party seem more inviting to relationships or less vulnerable to exploitation.  Relationship and negotiations across culturesGood relationships can lead to good negotiation results (Halpert, Stuhlmacher, Crenshaw, Litcher, & Bortel, 2010).  Building relationship with members of other cultures requires additional skills abilities.  Cultural Intelligence (CQ) includes a combination of cognitive, behavioral, motivational, and metacognitive aspects (Ang, Van Dyne, Koh, et. al, 2007).  High CQ indicates ability to adjust cross culturally including developing relationships with people in the target culture.  In order to develop CQ, people can study and gain experiences.  Learning depends partly awareness, and greater awareness means more ability to identify the differences that matter and the adjustments to behavior, speech, and interaction that matter (Triandis, 2006).  Thus awareness and motivation are foundational, but ongoing effort is needed to communicate with mentors, interculturally fluent people (Baber, 2012), experts, instructors, and individuals who can provide quick feedback, in order to become highly successful.   Negotiation StructureNegotiations can be described as a process because they have a beginning and an end.  A process can be separated into phases at the highest level, with each phase containing many aggregated activities.  Phases that cover the entire life cycle of a negotiation start with review of the strategic level value chain followed by planning of the deal and then by the main interactions among the parties.  These three phases are followed by the ratification phase when any agreements are finalized and formalized.  Finally, agreements are implemented, monitored, and the negotiation process and outputs are evaluated.  In cases where the topics are relatively complex, for example international trade deals and large corporate mergers, there may be a follow on phase in which subordinate agreements are negotiated or adjustments to the main agreement are renegotiated (Baber, 2918).  Theory generally suggests that the interaction among parties will include distributive and integrative moments or sections and some models place this near, in terms of time and process, the end of negotiation and close to the moment of agreement (Gulliver, 1979; Lax & Sebenius, 2006; Susskind, 2010; Craver, 2012).  In this section it is also appropriate to note negotiation proposals that are not be intended for completion.  These are bad faith negotiations that may be smoke screens to distract from other tasks or to gain time (Faure 2012). Communication E-Negotiation is associated with the communication performance and effectiveness of communication tools.  The key theory to support the e-Negotiation is Media Capability Theory (Dennis, Fuller and Valacich, 2008) which is developed from the perspective of Task-Technology Fit (Goodhue and Thompson, 1995; Zigurs and Buckland, 1998).  The media capability theory incorporates both technology and task characteristics to investigate the communication process that fits the use of tool to reach communication effectiveness.The media capability theory links the media capabilities and communication processes that fit to perform communication.  First of all, the media capabilities feature the transmission and processing capabilities to associate with media synchronicity that enables the communicator to coordinate the use of tool and information.  The media capabilities cover the features of “transmission velocity”, “parallelism”, “symbol sets”, “rehearsability” and “reprocessability”.  Secondly, the communication processes differentiate the information conveyance and information convergence to interact with media transmission and process capabilities to propose the fit of tools.  For instance, the media transmission capability for communication conveyance enables communicators to provide new, diverse and larger type of information.  In contrast, the media processing capability for communication conveyance enables communicators to indicate retrospective events and deliberation.  Moreover, the media transmission capability for communication convergence enables communicators to identify familiar, distilled and smaller type of information.  Yet, the media processing capability for communication convergence enables communicators to verify information, adjust to the given ideas and negotiate the differences.  Moreover, there are interaction factors between the communicators in the process of negotiation, such as the familiarity between the negotiators, the training of utilizing technological communication tools, the past experience to use tools and between the negotiators and the social norms.  The fit among media capabilities, communication processes and interaction factors would affect the negotiators to reach shared understanding and thereby delivering their tasks; such as the quality of outcome and the time efficiency. Game theory and negotiatingGame theory in negotiations rests on the notion of maximizing utility.  The repeated form of the Prisoners Dilemma “game” helps to explain how parties communicate even without verbally discussing and coordinating their moves.  In Prisoner’s Dilemma, players react to the moves of the other person.  If the move is favorable, they should react with a positive move to continue and reinforce the flow of benefits.  Returning a favorable move with a favorable move is referred to as cooperating.  On the other hand, if one party delivers a move that hurts the other party, they should react with a similarly negative move; this is called defecting.  Negotiators, according to this theory, constantly choose either to cooperate or to harm the other and maximize their own benefit.  Game theory also helps negotiators to determine payouts and with this knowledge they can choose to move rationally toward optimizing the gains for one or all parties.  
Chapter 13 Appendix I Glossary3D Negotiation: involves three phases of action 1) what to do at the table; 2) designing the target agreement; 3) setup of the overall negotiation.  Lax and Sebenius (2006) wrote a book called 3D Negotiation which has been widely translated; check to find a copy in your language.  Anchoring: setting the expectations about cost and the general price range by making the first price offer.  It is generally a good idea to make the first price offer based on sensible price research.  Assertive: strongly demandingAt the table: formal negotiation time when the parties are talking.  Imagine all parties sitting at a table, talking.Away from the table: time and situations (breaks, recesses, meals, weekends, nights) when the parties are not formally negotiating.Bargaining chip: a relatively unimportant concession that you plan to give in exchange for some concession.  Sometimes these are called sweeteners.Bargaining/Bartering: conceding low-priority items for concessions on items that are more important to you.  Also called “logrolling” or making tradeoffs.  This approach is practical with relatively simple issues and is often used to sweeten a proposal with concessions.  Bottom line: sometimes this phrase is used with the meaning of reserve price or point (see below).BATNA: Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement (sometimes also called the “walk away”).  BATNA is the result you would have if you did not negotiate.  See Chapter 3.Claiming value: trying to get the parts of a business arrangement that are most useful (and valuable) to you.  See Chapter 1.Concession: something that you give or receive, for example, a better price, a change of schedule, or a change of product that suits the other parties.  Consensus: agreement.  Negotiators manage consensus within their team, with their back table, and ultimately with their counterparties.  Counterpart(y): a negotiator from the other side of the negotiating table.Creating value: discovering new opportunities for value and profit.  See Chapter 1.Deadlock: a situation in which there is no progress and no agreement.  The parties must break the deadlock or give up and follow their BATNA.Deal: the package of issues in the negotiation.  Also, the agreement.Deal/no-deal balance: the thinking and decision making that go into agreeing or not agreeing; the considerations that lead negotiators to accept and offer or choose their BATNA.Deal breaker/show stopper: an issue that must be resolved or it will cause the entire negotiation to fail.  Obviously it is important to identify and manage these issues in advance of negotiations.Deceit: providing information that is not true.  This is almost always a bad idea.  You may gain in the short term, but you may damage yourself in the long term.Delinkage: separating an issue from other issues in the negotiation; Delink if a particular issue threatens to ruin the negotiation, or if you can sensibly separate groups of issues from each other.Distributive negotiating: negotiating the sharing or claiming of limited resources (such as time, money, products, etc.) in a win-lose approach.  Empathy: understanding for feelings of other parties.  False concession: pretending that a concession you must give or do not care about is a concession that you did not want to give.  You can trade this “false” concession for something of value.  Not recommended – when the other side learns that they had to fight for something they could have gotten without any question, the relationship may be damaged.  FOTE: Full Open Truthful Exchange.  This means telling everything to the other sides.  Parties tell the whole truth concealing nothing.  This is sensible in negotiations where all sides have confidence in creating value jointly and sharing it reasonably.  See POTE.Hardball tactics: a variety of aggressive tactics such as threats and delays, and so on.  Basically these are unprofessional and unsuitable for most business negotiation.  However some businesses use hardball tactics to put pressure on the other party.  Having a good BATNA will protect you from most hardball tactics.  At the table, hardball tactics are best met with silence, or by resuming your normal questions.  Integrative negotiating: bringing together many issues in order to solve problems, maximize mutual gains, repackage and optimize, and make robust agreements.Interests: things that a negotiator (person, team, organization) wants.  These things can be tangible (money, buildings, equipment, etc.) or intangible (services, pride, success, dignity, etc.).  Linkage/integration: combining and relating issues in the negotiation.Mutual gains: solutions that benefit you and all parties in the negotiation.  The benefits can be different for the different partners.  Negotiation: a discussion with the intent to agree.  The discussions include sharing of information; the making, rejecting and adjust of offers; the solving of problems; and the making of decisions and agreements.  In this textbook, the topic is always generally that of business, not politics, policy, hostages or other topics.Opponent: a person or group you are fighting…never use this word when talking about negotiating.  You should never fight negotiation counterparts!Party: a person or group in a negotiation.  The same meaning as counterpart, counterparty, or negotiation partner.  POTE: Partial Open Truthful Exchange.  Parties tell the truth, but not the whole truth.  Parties may wish to conceal certain info such as reserve price and items they want to offer as false concessions.Principled Negotiation: (sometimes called mutual gains bargaining) means trying to increase the total value of the negotiation by developing new ideas with your counterparts.  Reciprocity: (sometimes called the norm of reciprocity) The back and forth sharing of information among negotiating parties.  When one side gives a little, others are likely to give too.  Do not give away all your information at once in order to develop a comfortable exchange of facts and ideas.  Reciprocity not only shares information, it helps to build up the relationship.  Relationships: the long-term connection between the people and organizations in a negotiationReserve point or reserve price: the maximum price a buyer is willing to pay.  The minimum price a seller is willing to accept.  Also called the reservation price or the walk away point.  If the negotiation issue is not about money, it means the extreme maximum or minimum that a party is willing to give or accept in terms of concessions or resources.  Beyond the reserve point, there is no logic in continuing the negotiation and you should choose your BATNA (walk away).  Stalling: intentionally wasting time to put pressure on the other side or push them into a quick unfavorable agreement.  This tactic is not recommended because time pressure is a two-edged sword!Stereotype: a superficial description of a person based on a group, not individuals.  Stereotyping leads to misunderstandings if applied to individuals.  Stereotyping is only useful as a starting point for careful research into what groups and individuals expect and prefer as well as research into their unique preferences.Strategy: an overall approach to a negotiation.  High level strategies include compromise, collaborate, collapse, and avoid.  At a lower level of detail, specific strategies include the goals of the negotiation and the sequence of moves necessary to arrive at the goals.  Synergy: working together to create new benefits that parties could not manage alone.  Tactic: a specific effort to influence the negotiation, for example through behavior, framing of offers, deceit, staged release of information, increasing or decreasing the comfort level of the other parties.  Tactics may be distributive or integrative.  Integrative tactics can be used to develop a negotiation, or misused to take advantage of the other negotiators.  Distributive tactics may bring short term results but may also derail a negotiation.  Distributive tactics are best used in limited ways, and rarely, in order to slightly improve tangible outcomes.Threats: a hardball tactic…do not threaten your counterparts because it will damage the relationship.  A threat may however be effective in bringing a party into a negotiation when they have refused to join.  In such cases, the relationship is already quite damaged, and there may be nothing more to lose.  Ultimatum: a strong offer or demand that must be agreed to immediately.  This is a high pressure tactic.  Typically these are offered at the last moment.  This tactic is easily defeated by extending your time and continuing a calm discussion.  Walking out: a hardball tactic…only walk out if your BATNA is good enough to break off negotiations.  Do not walk out in order to put pressure on the other parties.Walk away point: the same as reserve point.Win/Lose: a very simplified form of thinking about negotiating.  Suitable only for distributive negotiations.Win/Win: a more complex and better way of thinking about negotiating – create a deal that all sides can be satisfied with.  However, an even better way is to create new value for all parties and go beyond win/win to synergize and create new value.You can find additional useful definitions at http://www.negotiations.com/definition/ and other Internet locations.